Annual Report
2023
Contents
The year at a glance 4
Year in figures 6
1 Inflation declines sharply as the ECB’s monetary policy tightening
continues to be transmitted strongly 7
1.1 Global economic activity expanded at a moderate pace as
headline inflation declined 7
1.2 Economic activity stagnates in the euro area 10
1.3 Fiscal policy measures in a challenging macroeconomic
environment 14
1.4 Headline inflation saw a steep decline throughout the year 17
1.5 Credit and financing conditions tightened strongly as policy rates
increased 20
Box 1 The macroeconomic implications of climate change 22
Box 2 The role of unit profits in recent domestic price pressures 25
2 Monetary policy in restrictive territory 28
2.1 Pursuing a restrictive monetary policy to bring inflation back to
the 2% target 29
2.2 Eurosystem balance sheet developments as monetary policy
tightens further 32
2.3 Managing financial risks of monetary policy instruments 38
Box 3 The evolution of excess liquidity and its impact on the euro
unsecured market rate 40
3 European financial sector: resilient but operating in a fragile
financial stability environment 43
3.1 The financial stability environment in 2023 43
3.2 Macroprudential policy: safeguarding financial sector resilience
in turbulent macro-financial conditions 45
3.3 Microprudential activities to ensure the safety and soundness of
individual banks 48
3.4 The ECB’s contribution to EU and international policy initiatives 49
ECB Annual Report 2023 1
4 Smooth functioning of market infrastructure and payments 53
4.1 TARGET Services 53
4.2 Digital euro project 54
4.3 Innovation and integration of market infrastructure and payments 55
4.4 Oversight and the role of central bank of issue 56
Box 4 New technologies for wholesale central bank money settlement 58
5 Market operations activities and financial services provided to
other institutions 60
5.1 Developments in market operations 60
5.2 Administration of EU borrowing and lending operations 62
5.3 Eurosystem reserve management services 63
6 Cash remains the most frequently used means of payment among
European citizens, with a low level of counterfeiting 64
6.1 Circulation of euro banknotes and ensuring access to and
acceptance of cash 64
6.2 Study on the environmental footprint of euro banknotes 65
6.3 Development of euro banknote counterfeiting 66
6.4 Preparations for future euro banknotes 66
7 Statistics 68
7.1 New and enhanced euro area statistics and other developments 68
7.2 Publication of new climate-related statistical indicators 69
7.3 Making banks’ data reporting more efficient 69
Box 5 First release of new Household Distributional Wealth Accounts 70
Box 6 Payments statistics ‒ enhanced scope and higher frequency 71
8 ECB research activities 73
8.1 Update on ESCB research initiatives 73
8.2 Update on ECB research initiatives 74
8.3 Update on the work of ESCB research clusters 75
ECB Annual Report 2023 2
Box 7 Economic dynamics after extreme events – quantifying the
financial stability trade-offs for monetary policy during periods of
high inflation 75
9 ECB legal activities and duties 77
9.1 Jurisdiction of the Court of Justice of the European Union
concerning the ECB 77
9.2 ECB opinions and cases of non-compliance 78
9.3 Compliance with the prohibition of monetary financing and
privileged access 81
10 The ECB in an EU and international context 83
10.1 The ECB’s accountability 83
10.2 International relations 84
Box 8 The ECB’s secondary objective in monetary policy 86
11 Promoting good governance, social and environmental
sustainability 88
11.1 Updates on environmental, social and governance matters 88
11.2 Strengthening ethics and integrity 89
11.3 Communication and transparency of ECB policy 91
11.4 Empowering our people to excel for Europe 93
11.5 Advancing work on environmental and climate-related
challenges 98
Box 9 ECB keeping up with innovation 101
12 Meet our people 103
Annual Accounts A1
Consolidated balance sheet of the Eurosystem as at 31 December 2023 C1
ECB Annual Report 2023 3
The year at a glance
In 2023 the ECB consolidated progress in its fight against inflation in the euro area.
The year began with headline inflation still close to record highs. The negative
effects of earlier supply and demand shocks, while easing, were still driving up
prices. But two key developments paved the way for inflation to decline sharply
during the year.
First, the effects of the past shocks began to fade. Energy prices, which had spiked
as a consequence of Russia’s unjustified war against Ukraine, fell steeply, and
global supply bottlenecks further eased. The drop in energy prices, in particular,
accounted for half of the decline in inflation in 2023. Second, the ECB continued to
tighten monetary policy, which helped to lower inflation further by dampening
demand. Altogether, from January to September, we raised interest rates by an
additional 200 basis points.
In doing so, we continued to follow a data-dependent approach to rate decisions
given the highly uncertain environment. To calibrate accurately how far rates needed
to rise, we introduced three criteria: the inflation outlook, the dynamics of underlying
inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. By September, we saw
the inflation outlook improving and monetary policy being transmitted forcefully. But
underlying inflation remained elevated and domestic price pressures were strong.
We decided on this basis that the key ECB interest rates had reached levels that, if
maintained for a sufficiently long duration, would make a substantial contribution to
the timely return of inflation to our target. At the same time, we committed to holding
rates at these levels for as long as necessary, while continuing to follow a data-
dependent approach, based on the same criteria, to determine the appropriate level
and duration of restriction.
In parallel, we advanced the normalisation of the Eurosystem balance sheet to
ensure it remained consistent with our overall stance. It fell by over €1 trillion in
2023, with a large part of this decline due to maturing and early repayments under
our targeted longer-term refinancing operations. We also concluded reinvestments
under our asset purchase programme as the year progressed. And, in December,
we announced the gradual phasing-out of reinvestments under the pandemic
emergency purchase programme.
While we were consolidating progress in the fight against inflation, we advanced our
work on taking account of climate-related risks within our tasks. In March we
published the first climate-related financial disclosures of the Eurosystem’s corporate
sector holdings. The carbon intensity of our corporate asset reinvestments fell by
around two-thirds in the 12 months from October 2022 when we had started tilting
them towards issuers with a better climate performance.
In 2023 we saw considerable progress in another area crucial for our work:
payments. We launched our new T2 wholesale payment system in March. T2
ECB Annual Report 2023 4
contributes to the harmonisation and efficiency of Europe’s financial markets,
introducing a new real-time gross settlement system – which replaces the TARGET2
system that had been in operation since 2007 – and streamlining liquidity
management of central bank money.
We also launched the preparation phase of the digital euro project. This phase
started in November after a fruitful two-year investigation phase, and will lay the
foundations for the potential issuance of a digital euro. A digital euro would
complement cash, not replace it. Cash remains the most frequently used means of
payment among euro area citizens, and a clear majority consider it important to have
the ability to pay in cash.
This is in part why the ECB is preparing a new series of euro banknotes – the most
tangible, visible symbol of European unity. The Governing Council selected
“European culture” and “Rivers and birds” as two potential themes for this new
series, based on the outcome of two public surveys carried out in the summer of
2023. Looking ahead, European citizens will have the chance to express their
preferences on a shortlist of possible designs, with the ECB expected to decide on
the final designs in 2026.
In a year that marked the 25th anniversary of the ECB, we celebrated the arrival of
Croatia in the euro area. Croatia’s adoption of the euro in January brought the
number of countries in the euro area to 20 – almost double the number when the
single currency was first launched. The euro area’s expansion reflects the continued
attractiveness of our monetary union in an increasingly unpredictable world. In 2023
people’s support for the euro remained close to record high levels.
All this could not have been done without the hard work and the dedication of ECB
staff to our mission: maintaining price stability for the people of the euro area. It is an
honour to lead them and this institution.
Frankfurt am Main, April 2024
Christine Lagarde
President
ECB Annual Report 2023 5
Year in figures
The euro area labour market was resilient Inflation in the euro area declined sharply
The euro area unemployment rate averaged 6.5% in 2023, Headline inflation in the euro area was 2.9% in December 2023,
falling from 6.6% in January to 6.5% in March and remaining down from 9.2% in December 2022. The decline was increasingly
broadly stable for the remainder of the year. broad-based across components.
The ECB raised its key interest rates further Euro area bank resilience strengthened further
The ECB raised its key interest rates by a further 200 basis The Common Equity Tier 1 ratio of euro area banks stood at
points over 2023, bringing the deposit facility rate to 4%. The 15.6% in the third quarter. This was close to its highest level
tightening of monetary policy was transmitted forcefully to the since the start of European banking supervision and reflected the
economy. higher profitability and de-risking of bank portfolios.
Payment preferences New ECB statistical indicators on climate change
60% of euro area citizens consider having the option to pay in The ECB published three new sets of statistical indicators on
cash important. At the same time, just over half of euro area sustainable finance, carbon emissions and physical risks as part
consumers prefer to pay by card or other electronic payment of its broader climate action plan.
methods.
25th anniversary of the European Central Bank Corporate sector portfolio decarbonisation
In 2023 the ECB celebrated its 25th anniversary with the The carbon intensity of reinvestments decreased by more than
message “The Value of Unity”, allowing the ECB to highlight the 65% in the 12 months that followed the start of tilted
success of the single currency and its benefits for the people of reinvestments in October 2022.
Europe.
ECB Annual Report 2023 6
1 Inflation declines sharply as the ECB’s
monetary policy tightening continues to
be transmitted strongly
The global economy fared better in 2023 than initially expected, continuing to expand
at a moderate pace. The expansion was driven mainly by economic growth in
emerging market economies and the United States, while most other advanced
economies were more strongly affected by tight financing conditions and
considerable geopolitical uncertainty. Global inflation declined markedly as energy
commodity prices fell, while underlying price pressures remained elevated. The euro
strengthened in nominal effective terms and against the US dollar.
In the euro area economic growth weakened in 2023. The industrial sector was
particularly affected by tighter financing conditions, high input costs and weak global
demand, whereas the services sector was initially still supported by lingering effects
from the post-pandemic reopening of the economy. While the ECB’s interest rate
tightening was transmitted forcefully to economic activity, the labour market
remained fairly resilient. Euro area governments continued to wind down support
measures adopted in response to the pandemic, energy price and inflation shocks,
reversing part of the previous fiscal loosening. Headline inflation declined sharply in
the euro area, helped particularly by energy inflation dropping into negative territory
as the strong energy price surges of 2022 unwound. Underlying inflation also started
to moderate, underpinning a general disinflationary process and reflecting the fading
impact of past shocks and the increasing effects of tighter monetary policy. However,
domestic price pressures replaced external pressures as the most important inflation
drivers, as the labour market supported strong nominal wage developments, with
workers seeking compensation for past inflation-induced losses in purchasing power.
1.1 Global economic activity expanded at a moderate pace
as headline inflation declined
Global economic growth was The global economy continued to expand at a moderate pace in 2023, with growth
moderate in the face of monetary
remaining broadly unchanged from 2022 at 3.5% (Chart 1.1).1 Although subdued in
policy tightening and high
uncertainty a historical comparison, growth was higher than expected at the start of the year,
supported by strong labour markets and buoyant demand for services despite
continued monetary policy tightening.2 The global economy was driven mainly by
activity in emerging market economies and the United States, while in most other
advanced economies tight financing conditions and the prolonged effects of
geopolitical factors on energy prices weighed more materially on demand. In the
1 The global economy as referred to in this section of the Annual Report excludes the euro area.
2 The Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections in December 2022 projected global growth to slow to
2.6% in 2023.
ECB Annual Report 2023 7
United States, the economy was more resilient than expected, on the back of robust
domestic demand and a strong labour market. Turmoil in the US financial sector at
the beginning of the year did not have a significant macroeconomic impact. In China,
an economic rebound at the beginning of the year, following the relaxation of highly
restrictive pandemic-related measures in December 2022, was ended by a renewed
slump in the housing sector as well as weak domestic and external demand. The
Chinese economy nonetheless achieved the government’s stated growth target of
around 5%.
Chart 1.1
Global GDP and its composition
a)Global real GDP growth b)Composition of global growth
(annual percentage changes) (percentage point contributions)
Sources: ECB, ECB staff calculations and ECB staff macroeconomic projections, March 2024
Notes: “Global GDP” excludes the euro area. The pre-pandemic average is for the period from 2012 to 2019. Values for 2023 are
estimates based on available data and the March 2024 ECB staff macroeconomic projections.
Global trade momentum weakened Global trade was weak in 2023, as import growth slowed to 1.2%, well below the
as consumption patterns
previous year’s growth rate of 5.5% and the pre-pandemic average of 3.1%.3 The
normalised after the pandemic
slowdown reflected three major trends. First, global demand moved back from goods
towards services as pandemic-related restrictions were fully phased out. Second, the
share of consumption, which is generally less trade-intensive than investment, in
domestic demand increased. Finally, emerging market economies, where trade
responds less to changes in economic activity, made a larger contribution to global
activity in 2023. Despite increasing trade barriers and business survey results
suggesting possible value chain relocation, evidence of fragmentation in aggregate
trade flows has so far remained limited.
Inflation declined but underlying Annual headline consumer price index (CPI) inflation across OECD member
price pressures remained elevated
countries excluding Türkiye declined from high levels during 2023, brought down by
lower energy prices. It fell to 3.9% in December, and for the whole of 2023 stood at
5.3%, compared with 7.3% in 2022 (Chart 1.2, panel a). Inflation excluding energy
and food also declined, but to a much lesser extent, indicating that underlying price
3 The pre-pandemic average is measured over the period from 2012 to 2019.
ECB Annual Report 2023 8
pressures remained strong and broad-based. This was particularly evident in
advanced economies, where tight labour markets contributed to high wage growth
rates, making services price inflation more persistent (Chart 1.2, panel b).
Chart 1.2
OECD headline and core inflation rates
a)Headline inflation and its main components b)Inflation in major economies
(annual percentage changes, monthly data) (annual percentage changes, monthly data)
Sources: National sources via Haver Analytics, OECD and ECB staff calculations.
Notes: EA: euro area. OECD inflation excludes Türkiye and is computed on the basis of national CPIs and annual private final
consumption expenditure weights expressed in purchasing power parity terms. Core inflation excludes energy and food. The latest
observations are for December 2023.
Energy commodity prices declined Energy commodity prices declined throughout 2023 as a result of lower demand. Oil
as low demand outweighed supply
prices fell by 4%, as weak demand for oil from advanced economies outweighed the
constraints
increase in demand that followed the relaxation of lockdown measures in China. Low
oil demand also more than offset the effects of supply cuts by the OPEC+ group as
well as the risks to supply from geopolitical factors including the sanctions on Russia
and the conflict in the Middle East. The fall in European gas prices was substantially
larger, as gas prices continued the decline that started towards the end of 2022 and
were reduced by another 58% in the course of 2023. European gas consumption
remained below historical norms as a result of lower industrial demand, reduced gas
consumption among households and mild weather in the winter months. The stable
supply of liquified natural gas (LNG) also allowed European countries to start the
heating season with full gas storage. Despite greater stability in the European gas
market compared with the previous year, supply risks, such as strikes at Australian
LNG terminals, continued to cause periods of high price volatility, illustrating the
sensitivity of the European gas market during the transition away from Russian gas
imports.
The euro strengthened in nominal The euro strengthened in nominal effective terms (+3.9%) and against the US dollar
effective terms and against the US
(+3.4%) on the basis of year-end data, amid notable intra-year fluctuations. The
dollar
exchange rate dynamics were primarily influenced by evolving market expectations
resulting from shifts in monetary policies and volatile economic outlooks. Initially
bolstered in the first half of the year by improved macroeconomic conditions in the
ECB Annual Report 2023 9
euro area and a faster pace of monetary policy tightening, the euro started to
depreciate against the US dollar in mid-July. The strengthening of the dollar, which
was broad-based, was attributed to positive economic data surprises and market
expectations of a tighter-for-longer monetary policy stance in the United States. A
reassessment of the stance towards the end of the year amid declining inflation rates
resulted in a renewed appreciation of the euro. Across major trading partners'
currencies, the euro strengthened significantly against the Turkish lira, the Russian
rouble, the Japanese yen and the Norwegian krone. However, it weakened against
the pound sterling, the Swiss franc and the Polish zloty.
The major risks to the outlook for global economic growth at the end of 2023
included a further escalation of geopolitical tensions, a stronger slowdown in the
Chinese economy and more persistent inflationary pressures that would require
tighter monetary policy than anticipated. The materialisation of such risks would
reduce global economic activity. Moreover, global commodity markets remained very
sensitive to supply risks, which in turn could fuel inflation and weigh on global growth
in the year ahead.
1.2 Economic activity stagnates in the euro area
Euro area growth weakened as the Euro area real GDP rose by 0.4% in 2023, having grown by 3.4% in 2022 (Chart
effects of higher interest rates
1.3). Growth reflected positive contributions from domestic demand and net trade.
broadened
Changes in inventories had a dampening impact. By the end of the year output in the
euro area was 3.0% above its pre-pandemic level (in the final quarter of 2019) and
1.4% above its level in the first quarter of 2022, when Russia invaded Ukraine. The
slowdown in growth in 2023 was largely attributable to the economic repercussions
of the war, which had varying effects across countries, reflecting their different
economic structures. While the industrial sector was particularly affected by tighter
monetary policy, high energy prices and weakening global demand, the services
sector held up relatively well, still benefiting from post-pandemic reopening effects.
However, towards the end of the year the weakness in growth dynamics broadened
as the impact of higher interest rates spread across the various sectors, alongside
spillover effects from the weak industrial sector to services.
ECB Annual Report 2023 10
Chart 1.3
Euro area real GDP
(annual percentage changes; percentage point contributions)
Source: Eurostat.
Note: The latest observations are for 2023.
Consumer spending was geared Private consumption growth weakened considerably in 2023. It stagnated in the first
more towards services than goods
half of the year as the continued drop in spending on goods, as captured by retail
trade volumes (Chart 1.4), offset the still positive demand for services. In the third
quarter private consumption increased, driven by households’ consumption of
services, which was boosted by lingering reopening effects, and the rebound in
spending on durable goods. Overall spending on goods (including semi-durable and
non-durable goods) continued to contract amid tighter financing conditions. Overall,
household spending increased by 0.5% in 2023. Real disposable income supported
household spending to some extent in 2023 as nominal wage growth increased,
inflation slowed down gradually and employment growth remained resilient.
Nevertheless, the transmission of tighter financing conditions to the real economy
seems to have weighed on household spending, as savings remained elevated.
ECB Annual Report 2023 11
Chart 1.4
Euro area production and retail trade
(index: June 2022 = 100)
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.
Notes: Retail trade is shown in real terms. The latest observations are for December 2023 for services production, otherwise for
January 2024.
Investment was dampened by Non-construction investment growth (a proxy for private non-housing investment)
tighter financing conditions
slowed throughout 2023.4 While the first quarter of the year saw robust growth on
the back of easing supply bottlenecks, the quarterly rates of increase gradually
declined and investment fell in the fourth quarter, as both domestic and foreign
demand weakened, backlogs dissolved, corporate profits slowed and financing
conditions tightened. Uncertainty stemming from Russia’s war against Ukraine and
the conflict in the Middle East among other factors likely also reduced investment
incentives for firms. Nevertheless, abundant profits, ample cash reserves and a
decline in indebtedness have on average strengthened corporate balance sheets
over past years and contributed – along with funds from the Next Generation EU
(NGEU) programme supporting digitalisation and climate-related investment – to
some resilience of investment compared with other expenditure components.
Overall, non-construction investment grew by 2.9% in 2023.
Construction investment broadly continued to weaken over the course of 2023. The
main reason for this was the decline in residential construction investment due to
high construction costs, the continued rise in mortgage interest rates and the
tightening of bank lending standards, which made it more difficult for households to
access finance and dampened demand for residential property. Other areas of
construction, such as civil engineering, remained more resilient, supported by public
infrastructure investments. At the end of 2023 construction investment was 2.1%
above its pre-pandemic level, having fallen by 0.6% overall in 2023.
The euro area goods trade balance returned to surplus in 2023 amid lower prices for
imported energy. Export growth remained subdued in a context of weak foreign
demand. Manufacturing exports were supported by the easing of supply bottlenecks,
4 See the box entitled “Intangible assets of multinational enterprises in Ireland and their impact on euro
area GDP”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3, ECB, 2023.
ECB Annual Report 2023 12
while lingering effects from the energy supply shock and the appreciation of the euro
in effective terms contributed to export weakness. The subdued export performance
extended to services exports in the second half of the year, as support from pent-up
demand after the reopening of the global economy was fading. As domestic demand
cooled, euro area imports also declined, driven by decreasing intermediate goods
imports as firms destocked and energy imports fell. Overall, the contribution from
trade to euro area GDP growth was slightly positive in 2023.
Labour market
The euro area labour market remained resilient overall in 2023, although labour
market developments and survey indicators at the end of the year pointed towards a
cooling down. The unemployment rate averaged 6.5% in 2023; it declined from 6.6%
in January to 6.5% in March and remained broadly stable at that level for the rest of
the year (Chart 1.5). Total employment and total hours worked held up well amid a
stagnating economy, rising in 2023 by 1.4% and 1.6% respectively. Average hours
worked increased by only 0.2% in 2023, and in the last quarter of 2023 stood 1.3%
below the pre-pandemic level, likely driven by factors such as labour hoarding (i.e.
companies holding on to more workers than necessary in downturns) and an
increase in sick leave. The labour force participation rate in the age group 15-74
years increased to a level of 65.7% in the fourth quarter of 2023, 1.1 percentage
points above its pre-pandemic level. In the second half of the year, labour demand
showed some signs of softening, with the job vacancy rate still high but gradually
receding from the peak reached in the second quarter of 2022. Overall, while the
ECB’s interest rate increases continued to be transmitted forcefully to the economy,
total employment and the euro area labour market, which is among the European
Union’s objectives to which the ECB can contribute, if this is without prejudice to
maintaining price stability, remained relatively resilient.
ECB Annual Report 2023 13
Chart 1.5
Labour market
(left-hand scale: quarter-on-quarter percentage changes; right-hand scale: percentages)
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.
Note: The latest observations are for January 2024 for the unemployment rate, and for the fourth quarter of 2023 for employment and
hours worked.
1.3 Fiscal policy measures in a challenging macroeconomic
environment
The euro area budget deficit ratio The euro area general government deficit ratio continued to decrease in 2023,
decreased as governments started
following a path started at the height of the pandemic (Chart 1.6).5 The gradual
to wind down discretionary support
measures tightening of fiscal policy is also reflected in the fiscal stance, which tightened
moderately in 2023 for the third year in a row.6 However, only slightly over a third of
the loosening in 2020 has so far been reversed (Chart 1.6). This means that the
cyclically adjusted budget balance remains well below its pre-pandemic level, owing
to lasting measures adopted in the context of the pandemic in 2020 and the energy-
related support provided from 2022 onwards.
5 After the cut-off date for this report, official fiscal outcomes for 2023 were released which, in specific
countries, point to significantly higher budget deficits than previously estimated.
6 The fiscal stance reflects the direction and size of the stimulus from fiscal policies to the economy
beyond the automatic reaction of public finances to the business cycle. For more details on this
concept, see the article entitled “The euro area fiscal stance”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 4, ECB, 2016.
ECB Annual Report 2023 14
Chart 1.6
Euro area general government balance and fiscal stance
(percentages of GDP)
Sources: Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, December 2023 and ECB calculations.
Note: The measure of the fiscal stance is adjusted on the revenue side from 2021 by netting out grants from the NGEU Recovery and
Resilience Facility as these revenues do not have macroeconomic tightening effects.
A further tightening of the fiscal Seen from the end-2023 perspective, a challenge for fiscal authorities will be how
stance would be appropriate
best to reverse this cumulative expansion of the last four years (Chart 1.7) and to
reduce debt ratios, particularly given that demographic developments, the green and
digital transitions as well as the geopolitical environment will require fiscal room for
manoeuvre in the future. The 2024 government budgets pointed towards a
continuation of the fiscal tightening cycle at the euro area level. This largely reflected
an unwinding of discretionary fiscal measures that had been adopted in response to
the energy and inflation shocks. Such measures were estimated to have amounted
to over 1% of GDP in 2023, yet only a small part of this was expected to remain in
place in 2024. Notably, however, some of the expansionary measures adopted by
governments during the pandemic seemed to be of a more long-lasting nature and,
on the basis of the 2024 budgets, were not set to expire in the short run. This was
the case for increased transfers and subsidies but to some extent also tax
reductions.
ECB Annual Report 2023 15
Chart 1.7
Decomposition of the euro area fiscal stance and discretionary measures
(percentages of GDP)
Sources: Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, December 2023 and ECB calculations.
Notes: The measure of the fiscal stance is adjusted on the revenue side from 2021 by netting out grants from the NGEU Recovery and
Resilience Facility as these revenues do not have macroeconomic tightening effects. “Other measures” mainly relates to measures
adopted during the pandemic and their subsequent unwinding.
A further tightening of the fiscal stance also appears appropriate from the viewpoint
of monetary policy. As the energy crisis has now largely faded, governments should
continue to roll back the related support measures, which is essential to avoid driving
up medium-term inflationary pressures. This would otherwise call for tighter
monetary policy. Besides rolling back the pandemic and energy-related measures,
governments should more generally make progress towards sounder fiscal positions
to ensure that public finances are on a sustainable path.
The EU needs a robust and A robust EU framework for economic and fiscal policy coordination and surveillance
credible framework for economic
remains crucial. After extensive discussions, the Council of the European Union
and fiscal policy coordination
agreed in 2023 on a reform of the EU’s economic governance framework, which
opened the way for a trilogue between the European Commission, the EU Council
and the European Parliament. 2024 will be an important year to transit towards its
implementation.7
7 In an opinion issued in July 2023, the ECB welcomed the European Commission’s reform proposals
and offered some technical observations and suggestions to further enhance the new framework and
ensure it will be more transparent and predictable. See Opinion of the European Central Bank of 5 July
2023 on a proposal for economic governance reform in the Union (CON/2023/20) (OJ C 290,
18.8.2023, p. 17).
ECB Annual Report 2023 16
1.4 Headline inflation saw a steep decline throughout the
year
Headline inflation in the euro area as measured by the Harmonised Index of
Consumer Prices (HICP) was 2.9% in December 2023, a decline of 6.3 percentage
points from its level in December 2022. It fell steadily throughout the year, with the
disinflationary process also showing up in underlying inflation as the year
progressed. In November headline inflation reached a temporary trough of 2.4%, the
lowest level in more than two years (sharply down from the peak of 10.6% in October
2022) (Chart 1.8). However, inflation moved slightly higher again in December,
owing to the downward effects of energy-related fiscal measures on price levels a
year earlier. All major components of inflation saw declines in year-on-year inflation
rates over the second half of 2023, reflecting the fading impact of previous cost
shocks and weaker demand amid tighter monetary policy. However, year-on-year
inflation rates (other than for energy prices) were at year-end still significantly above
their longer-term averages, while annualised quarter-on-quarter rates had already
moved much closer to such benchmarks. Price dynamics for goods decelerated
more swiftly than those for services, as easing supply bottlenecks and input costs
took considerable pressure off. Services price inflation rose until mid-year, owing to
still strong post-pandemic demand, increasing labour costs, and temporary factors
related to fiscal measures. With the reduction in energy and food inflation, the
disparities in inflation rates across euro area countries also diminished substantially.
Chart 1.8
Headline inflation and its main components
(annual percentage changes; percentage point contributions)
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations.
Note: The latest observations are for December 2023.
Energy inflation dropped sharply Developments in energy prices accounted for more than half of the drop in headline
while food inflation moderated
inflation between December 2022 and December 2023. Energy inflation was still
high in January 2023, but by year-end had declined by 25.6 percentage points into
negative territory. This reflected the unwinding of the strong surges in wholesale
ECB Annual Report 2023 17
energy prices that had taken place in 2022. However, energy inflation remained
somewhat volatile, as wholesale energy markets were sensitive to events such as
the conflict in the Middle East. Meanwhile, food inflation peaked at 15.5% in March
2023. It then declined substantially throughout the rest of the year, although was still
over 6% towards year-end owing to the persistent impact of earlier cost shocks
stemming from energy and other inputs, and to higher pressures from unit profits and
labour costs.
Underlying inflation started to Core inflation – as measured by HICP inflation excluding the volatile components
moderate but remained elevated at
energy and food – continued to increase into the first quarter of the year, but then
year-end
moderated from a peak of 5.7% to stand at 3.4% in December. This decline was
initially driven by non-energy industrial goods inflation, as demand for goods
weakened amid tighter financing conditions (see Section 1.2) and accumulated
pressures from past supply bottlenecks and high energy costs started to dissipate.
Meanwhile, services inflation hovered at high levels until August as a result of still
strong demand after the reopening of the economy (for contact-intensive services
sectors such as recreation and holidays) as well as rising labour costs, especially
given the larger labour share in the cost structure of the services sector compared
with manufacturing. Towards the end of the year, however, services inflation also fell
somewhat and confirmed the general disinflationary process. Moreover the lagged
dynamics in services inflation reflected the fact that many services components
typically lag headline inflation (e.g. housing, postal and medical services). All other
indicators of underlying inflation also moderated significantly during the year,
reflecting the fading impact of past shocks and the increasing impact of tighter
monetary policy, yet they continued to span a wide range and most indicators still
clearly exceeded pre-pandemic levels.8
Labour costs became the most Growth in the GDP deflator (a reliable measure of domestic price pressures) was on
important contributor to domestic
average 6.0% in 2023. This compared with average import price inflation of -2.9%,
inflation later in the year
reflecting the shift from external to domestic drivers of inflation. While profits had still
played a prominent role in domestic price pressures at the turn of the year 2022/
2023 (see Box 2), labour costs gradually became the dominant factor, given strong
wage developments and a reduction in labour productivity (Chart 1.9). Annual growth
in compensation per employee increased to 5.1% on average in 2023 from 4.5% in
2022, rates substantially above the pre-pandemic (2015-19) average of 1.7%, which
was facilitated by still tight labour markets (see Section 1.2). The further
strengthening reflected in part workers seeking compensation for past inflation-
induced losses in the purchasing power of nominal wages. Growth in negotiated
wages rose to 4.5% on average in 2023; the difference compared with actual wage
growth implies a still sizeable wage drift component, though lower than in 2021-22.9
Growth in both compensation per employee and negotiated wages started to edge
down towards the end of the year, but their growth levels remained elevated and
8 For more information on underlying inflation, see the box entitled “Underlying inflation measures: an
analytical guide for the euro area”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 5, ECB, 2023.
9 Wage drift measures deviations of developments in actual wages from developments in negotiated
wages, reflecting changes in overtime, bonuses, tight labour markets and other factors.
ECB Annual Report 2023 18
signalled still high nominal wage pressures going into 2024. This reflected a recovery
of real wages rather than evidence of destabilising wage-price dynamics.
Chart 1.9
Euro area compensation per employee
(annual percentage changes; percentage point contributions)
Sources: Eurostat, ECB and ECB calculations.
Longer-term inflation expectations Average longer-term inflation expectations of professional forecasters, which had
declined slightly, remaining
stood at 2.2% in late 2022, edged down to 2.1% in 2023. Other survey data, such as
anchored around the ECB’s 2%
target from the ECB Survey of Monetary Analysts and Consensus Economics, also
suggested that longer-term inflation expectations were well anchored around the
ECB’s 2% target. A market-based measure of longer-term inflation compensation
(the five-year forward inflation-linked swap rate five years ahead) rose to a peak of
2.7% in August, but decreased to 2.3% in late December amid news of lower than
anticipated headline inflation and a subdued economic growth outlook (see Section
1.2). In any case market-based measures corrected for risk premia implied “genuine”
expectations very close to 2%. On the consumer side, median inflation expectations
for three years ahead remained slightly above this at 2.5% in December, possibly
reflecting high uncertainty, negative economic sentiment and still high price levels
relative to wages.10
10 For more on consumer inflation perceptions and uncertainty, see the box entitled “A closer look at
consumers’ inflation expectations – evidence from the ECB’s Consumer Expectations Survey”,
Economic Bulletin, Issue 7, ECB, 2022. For recent results of the Consumer Expectations Survey on
economic growth expectations, see “Economic growth and labour markets”, ECB, 2024. For more
information on consumers’ perceptions of the relationship between inflation and economic conditions,
see Candia, B., Coibion, O. and Gorodnichenko, Y., “Communication and the Beliefs of Economic
Agents”, NBER Working Paper Series, No 27800, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.
ECB Annual Report 2023 19
1.5 Credit and financing conditions tightened strongly as
policy rates increased
Lower bond yields despite With inflationary pressures remaining elevated and persistent throughout 2023 (see
monetary policy tightening,
Section 1.4), the ECB continued to tighten monetary policy decisively until
reflecting a change in expectations
towards the end of the year September, and subsequently maintained the key ECB interest rates at restrictive
levels, to ensure that inflation returns to the 2% target over the medium term (see
Section 2.1). The – risk-free – ten-year overnight index swap (OIS) rate hovered
around 3% through most of the year, reaching a peak of 3.3% in October before
declining to an average 2.5% in December (Chart 1.10). The decline in the ten-year
OIS rate towards the end of the year was due to a sharp drop in financial market
interest rate expectations, mostly after inflation came in lower than expected. The
drop in expectations was only partially compensated by an increase in the term
premium. Long-term government bond yields followed developments in the OIS rate
very closely. Their spreads were not significantly affected by the process of
normalising the Eurosystem balance sheet (see Section 2.1) and at year-end were
virtually the same as in December 2022. The euro area GDP-weighted average of
ten-year nominal government bond yields averaged 2.7% in December 2023, 10
basis points below its level a year earlier.
Chart 1.10
Long-term interest rates, and the cost of borrowing for firms and for households for
house purchase
(percentages per annum)
Sources: Bloomberg, LSEG and ECB calculations.
Notes: Monthly observations. The euro area ten-year government bond yield is a GDP-weighted average. The indicators for the cost of
borrowing are calculated by aggregating short-term and long-term bank lending rates using a 24-month moving average of new
business volumes. The latest observations are for December 2023.
Equity markets were supported by Stock prices increased in 2023, in both the non-financial sector and, particularly, the
lower risk premia
banking sector. A decline in equity risk premia supported equity prices amid low and
falling volatility despite heightened geopolitical tensions. The index of euro area bank
stocks was boosted further by expectations of an increase in bank earnings in both
the long and short term, with the March banking sector market turbulence in the
United States and Switzerland having a sizeable but temporary negative impact. The
broad indices of euro area non-financial corporation and bank equity prices ended
ECB Annual Report 2023 20
2023 around 12% and 23% above their respective end-2022 levels. Corporate bond
yields declined and stood, on average, at lower levels in December 2023 than in
December 2022 in both the investment grade and high-yield segments, owing to
lower risk-free rates combined with a compression of corporate bond spreads.
Broad money and bank Broad money (M3) stagnated, mainly reflecting the tightening of monetary policy. Its
intermediation reflected the
annual rate of change was only 0.1% in December, having declined significantly
tightening of monetary policy
during 2023 and even temporarily reaching negative rates for the first time since the
inception of Monetary Union (Chart 1.11). The decline was driven by subdued credit
creation, high opportunity costs of holding liquid assets and the reduction in the
Eurosystem balance sheet. While bank balance sheets remained robust overall,
repayments of funds borrowed under the third series of targeted longer-term
refinancing operations and a contraction in the Eurosystem asset portfolios reduced
excess liquidity. Bank funding costs increased steeply, although by less than policy
rates, as banks turned to more expensive market funding sources and competed
more actively for customer deposits by offering higher interest on them.
Bank lending rates increased The transmission of the monetary policy tightening to broader financing conditions
steeply for firms and households as
remained strong in 2023. As indicated by the euro area bank lending survey, banks
monetary policy tightened
tightened their credit standards (i.e. internal guidelines or loan approval criteria) for
loans to households and firms substantially further. This was confirmed by the
survey on the access to finance of enterprises for firms and the Consumer
Expectations Survey for households. Nominal bank lending rates increased steeply
again in 2023, reaching their highest levels in almost 15 years. The composite bank
lending rate for loans to households for house purchase stood at 4.0% at the end of
the year, up by about 100 basis points compared with the end of 2022, and the
equivalent rate for non-financial corporations increased by 180 basis points to 5.2%,
a rise of almost twice the increase seen for households (Chart 1.10). The increases
in lending rates were more rapid and larger than in previous episodes of monetary
policy tightening, mostly reflecting the faster and larger policy rate hikes since July
2022. The disparity in lending rates across countries remained contained, indicating
that changes in the ECB’s monetary policy were being transmitted to lending rates
smoothly across the euro area.
Bank lending to households and Bank lending to households and firms weakened markedly in 2023, on the back of
firms weakened markedly
tighter credit conditions (Chart 1.11). Net monthly flows of loans were almost zero in
the last three quarters of the year. The annual growth rate of bank loans to
households declined, standing at 0.3% in December, mostly reflecting the slowdown
in mortgages amid falling house prices for the first year since 2014. The annual
growth rate of bank loans to firms also fell, reaching 0.4% in December, and the net
flows of overall external financing to firms were at historical lows (Chart 1.12).
ECB Annual Report 2023 21
Chart 1.11
M3 growth and the growth of credit to firms and households
(annual percentage changes)
Source: ECB.
Notes: Firms are non-financial corporations. The latest observations are for December 2023.
Chart 1.12
Net flows of external financing to firms
(annual flows in EUR billions)
Sources: ECB and Eurostat.
Notes: Firms are non-financial corporations. MFI: monetary financial institution. In “loans from non-MFIs and the rest of the world”,
non-monetary financial institutions consist of other financial intermediaries, pension funds and insurance corporations. “MFI loans” and
“loans from non-MFIs and the rest of the world” are corrected for loan sales and securitisation. “Other” is the difference between the
total and the instruments included in the chart and consists mostly of inter-company loans and trade credit. The latest observations are
for the third quarter of 2023. The annual flow for 2023 is computed as a four-quarter sum of flows from the fourth quarter of 2022 to the
third quarter of 2023.
Box 1
The macroeconomic implications of climate change
The ECB is working to better understand the macroeconomic consequences of climate change and
policies to mitigate its impact, in line with commitments made following the 2020-21 monetary policy
ECB Annual Report 2023 22
strategy review.11 These efforts are highly relevant to the ECB’s primary mandate to maintain price
stability. The complexity of climate change and the non-linear and highly uncertain nature of its
effects call for enhanced macroeconomic analysis to limit forecast errors and understand the
structural changes climate change is creating in the economy.
Climate change is already affecting euro area inflation. ECB research estimates that the extreme
summer heat in 2022 increased food inflation in Europe by around 0.7 percentage points after one
year, i.e. in 2023 (Chart A).12 Services inflation can also be affected by hotter summers, possibly
through the impact on food prices and the sensitivity of tourism-related services to temperature.13
The impact of higher summer temperatures on inflation could be greater in a hotter climate: a
heatwave similar to that of 2022 occurring in the climate of 2035 could, in a pessimistic scenario,
increase average food price inflation by 1 percentage point. In an optimistic scenario, the effect of a
similar heatwave would only be marginally less severe (0.8 percentage points). Increasing
temperatures will have a greater impact on regions that are already hotter. This implies different
effects on inflation in different euro area countries, which would make the transmission of a single
monetary policy more challenging.
Chart A
Increasing impact of heatwaves on food price inflation in Europe
(year of heatwave, percentage points)
Source: Kotz et al. (see footnote 12).
Notes: Impacts estimated with a global panel regression approach, using monthly prices and high-resolution climate data. The bars show the cumulative
deviation of food inflation from the baseline projection after 12 months as a result of extreme June, July and August temperatures. The chart is based on
combining elasticities of a 1°C increase in temperatures with results from 21 global climate models. Temperatures are based on a summer equivalent to that in
2022 (i.e. in the upper tail of the temperature distribution on the basis of projected future climates) and are retrieved from climate model results under an
optimistic emissions scenario (in which the rise in global temperatures would be below 2°C in 2100) and a pessimistic scenario (in which emissions would rise
throughout the next century). Impacts could be reduced through ambitious adaptation to warmer climates.
Extreme weather events typically reduce output in the short run, but the total economic impact
extends beyond the direct and immediate impacts that would arise, for example, through the
destruction of houses, factories and machinery. Examples include disruption in other regions or
sectors through supply-chain linkages or impaired infrastructure. Revenue losses in affected
11 See “ECB presents action plan to include climate change considerations in its monetary policy
strategy”, press release, ECB, 8 July 2021.
12 See Kotz, M., Kuik, F., Lis, E. and Nickel, C., “The impact of global warming on inflation: averages,
seasonality and extremes”, Working Paper Series, No 2821, ECB, May 2023.
13 See Ciccarelli, M., Kuik, F. and Martínez Hernández, C., “The asymmetric effects of weather shocks on
euro area inflation”, Working Paper Series, No 2798, ECB, March 2023.
ECB Annual Report 2023 23
sectors and lower output will usually reduce demand for the products and services of other sectors.
Another effect is higher uncertainty, which could lead households and businesses to reassess their
views on disaster risk and therefore depress spending.
Over longer horizons climate change can also reduce output growth more persistently.14 For
example, reduced snowfall will threaten the viability of many skiing areas in Europe, and some
Mediterranean regions may become too hot for summer tourism, although some northern regions
may benefit. Yields in agriculture and forestry will likely be depressed by hotter average
temperatures. While changing crops can alleviate some of the effects, less predictable temperature
and rainfall patterns are also likely to weigh on agricultural output. Higher temperatures above the
comfort zone of around 19-22°C – which are likely to occur more frequently in a warmer climate –
reduce the productivity of workers.
Adaptation, i.e. adjustment to warmer climates, could help limit macroeconomic impacts. This
includes, for example, installing air conditioning to reduce the impact of heat stress on labour
productivity, or switching crops to limit agricultural productivity losses. However, such measures will
likely have implications for government budgets and fiscal space.15 Insurance provides a further
tool for adaptation, but there is already a substantial climate insurance protection gap in Europe.16
Achieving emission reductions to meet the goals of the Paris Agreement and avert more
catastrophic global warming requires a wide-ranging structural transformation of the economy.
Capital and labour need to be reallocated across and within sectors, and even within individual
firms (e.g. car makers will need to switch factories from making combustion engine cars to making
battery-powered electric vehicles). The success of that reallocation will depend on the
implementation of effective transition policies; the flexibility of markets and in particular the ability of
the economy to finance and absorb the substantial capital investment required; the development of
decarbonised technologies and the availability of skilled labour to implement them.
Analysis suggesting a benign economic impact of climate policy measures introduced to date is
unlikely to capture the full picture.17 Available model-based assessments of carbon price pathways
find only a limited effect on output and inflation.18 However, the measures included still fall
substantially short of meeting the EU’s emission reduction target, and the broader impact of the
transition – including effects from strengthened regulation and targets – can be less straightforward
to quantify.
The speed of transition critically affects the ultimate economic impact: delaying the transition will
require faster and more radical policy changes later on, increasing the probability of stranded
assets and higher structural unemployment.19 Moreover, different transition policies vary in their
14 See the article entitled “How climate change affects potential output”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 6, ECB,
2023.
15 See “The climate change challenge and fiscal instruments and policies in the EU”, Occasional Paper
Series, No 315, ECB, revised June 2023.
16 See Christophersen, C. et al., “What to do about Europe’s climate insurance gap”, The ECB Blog, ECB,
24 April 2023.
17 See the box entitled “Climate-related policies in the Eurosystem/ECB staff macroeconomic projections
for the euro area and the macroeconomic impact of green fiscal measures”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 1,
ECB, 2023.
18 See the article entitled “The macroeconomic implications of the transition to a low-carbon economy”,
Economic Bulletin, Issue 5, ECB, 2023.
19 These issues are explored in the climate scenarios published by the Network for Greening the
Financial System, a group of 134 central banks and supervisors and 21 observers, to which the ECB
and the European System of Central Banks actively contribute.
ECB Annual Report 2023 24
impact on productivity.20 Market-based policies – such as carbon taxes – have less impact on the
productivity of carbon-intensive firms than non-market-based policies (such as banning certain
products or processes).
The competitiveness of the euro area economy is also affected by global choices regarding
transition policies. These include higher carbon prices as well as industrial policies such as the
recent Inflation Reduction Act in the United States. The EU Emissions Trading System (EU ETS)
can trigger “carbon leakage”, i.e. the relocation of economic activity and emissions to regions with
laxer emissions requirements. This can be reduced by carefully calibrating the Carbon Border
Adjustment Mechanism together with existing carbon leakage prevention mechanisms.21
Overall, climate change and mitigation policies affect nearly all aspects of macroeconomic analysis
performed by central banks. Key open questions remain, related for example to the way the
transition should unfold and the resultant structural changes to the economy; to the macroeconomic
impact of extreme weather and risks from accelerated climate change; and to the role of nature
capital and ecosystem services.
Box 2
The role of unit profits in recent domestic price pressures
This box focuses on how unit profits contributed to the dynamics of domestic price pressures in
2023 from an accounting perspective.
Domestic price pressures were very strong in 2023 but receded slightly in the course of the year
as unit profits declined
Growth in the GDP deflator, which shows a strong co-movement with developments in HICP
inflation excluding energy and food (HICPX), can be broken down into the contributions from unit
labour costs, unit profits and unit taxes (minus subsidies) (Chart A).22,23 Annual growth in the GDP
deflator rose significantly further in 2023, to an average of 6.0% from 4.7% in 2022. This contrasts
with an average rate over the period from 1999 to 2021 of 1.6%. From a historical high of 6.4% in
the first quarter of 2023, the growth figure started to moderate and reached 5.3% in the fourth
20 See Benatti, N., Groiss, M., Kelly, P., Lopez-Garcia, P., “Environmental regulation and productivity
growth in the euro area: testing the Porter hypothesis”, Working Paper Series, No 2820, ECB, May
2023.
21 See Böning, J., Di Nino, V. and Folger, T., “Benefits and costs of the ETS in the EU, a lesson learned
for the CBAM design”, Working Paper Series, No 2764, ECB, January 2023.
22 Unit profits are calculated as gross operating surplus and mixed income divided by real GDP and
include a correction for the income of the self-employed. A more encompassing indicator would set
gross operating surplus and mixed income in relation to real output, which includes intermediate
consumption in addition to GDP. However, real output is not available given a lack of information on
intermediate consumption.
23 The main conceptual differences between the GDP deflator and the HICPX result from the fact that the
latter is based on the selling prices of goods and services consumed by households in the categories
included whether they are produced domestically or imported, while the former captures the prices of
the value added of all products produced by the domestic economy and does not include the
contribution from intermediate consumption to final prices. See the box entitled “How have unit profits
contributed to the recent strengthening of euro area domestic price pressures?”, Economic Bulletin,
Issue 4, ECB, 2023.
ECB Annual Report 2023 25
quarter. Unit profits contributed over several quarters in 2022 and 2023 to the surge in the GDP
deflator, accounting for about half or more of its elevated growth rate. This compares with an
average contribution of slightly more than one-third over the period 1999 to 2019. The contribution
of unit profits then declined strongly during 2023, helping to offset increases in the contribution of
unit labour costs over the period.
Chart A
GDP deflator and contributions
(annual percentage changes; percentage point contributions)
Source: Eurostat and ECB calculations.
Exceptional economic developments after the pandemic explain strong unit profit growth in 2022
and early 2023
Unit profits typically move closely with developments in cyclical indicators such as real GDP. They
are, moreover, typically affected by marked changes in the terms of trade, for instance owing to
large fluctuations in import or oil prices. These features reflect the fact that, when demand is
stronger relative to potential output, it is easier for price-setters to raise prices and unit profits
without losing market share, while at times of input cost shocks e.g. from energy prices, profits are
typically used at least temporarily to avoid passing the full cost increase through to selling prices.
The economic weakening over 2022 and 2023, to the extent that it was driven by demand falling
relative to supply, and the sharp deterioration of the terms of trade in 2022, related to the surge in
import prices, would therefore have both pointed to weaker developments in unit profits than were
observed (Chart B). This suggests that other mechanisms and more exceptional factors may have
been at play during that period. One source of the strength of unit profits in these years was the
supply-demand imbalances in many economic sectors. While supply chain disruptions during the
pandemic led to widespread supply constraints, debt-financed government measures limited the
impact of the growth slowdown on disposable incomes and contributed to high savings. Such
savings and the related pent-up demand boosted demand in many sectors following the reopening
after the lockdowns. In such an environment of strong aggregate demand relative to supply,
pronounced input cost increases can lead price-setters to raise their prices without necessarily
ECB Annual Report 2023 26
changing their mark-up pricing strategy. This implies a pass-through of input costs and a large
contribution of unit profits to domestic price pressures, as recently observed.24
Chart B
Unit profits, real GDP and the import deflator
(annual percentage changes)
Source: Eurostat and ECB calculations.
Note: The latest observations are for the fourth quarter of 2023.
As exceptional factors unwound, unit profits realigned with the economic cycle and their typical
buffer role
With the fading of supply-demand imbalances after the pandemic and the significant moderation in
energy and other input cost pressures in the course of 2023, unit profit growth started to recede and
return gradually to more normal levels. The unwinding of supply-demand imbalances made it harder
to raise margins without losing market share and contributed to more contained increases in unit
profits. The turn in the environment towards more moderate input cost pressures allowed more
limited selling price dynamics. This meant that unit profit growth was set to decline even if firms
maintained their approach to passing through input cost prices and setting mark-ups. The decline in
input cost pressures may have, moreover, made it easier for firms to buffer labour cost pressures.
The weaker unit profit developments are also consistent with the relatively weak cyclical economic
environment in 2023. Overall, unit profits appear to have resumed their typical buffer role,
counteracting a larger pass-through of the high unit labour cost pressures to domestic prices.
24 See Arce, O., Hahn, E. and Koester, G., “How tit-for-tat inflation can make everyone poorer”, The ECB
Blog, ECB, 30 March 2023 and the box entitled “How have unit profits contributed to the recent
strengthening of euro area domestic price pressures?”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 4, ECB, 2023.
ECB Annual Report 2023 27
2 5
2 0
1 5
1 0
5
0
-5
-1 0
-1 52
0 0 5
U n it p ro fits
R e a l G D P
Im p o rt d e fla to r
2 0 0 6 2 0 0 7 2 0 0 8 2 0 0 9 2 0 1 0 2 0 1 1 2 0 1 2 2 0 1 3 2 0 1 4 2 0 1 5 2 0 1 6 2 0 1 7 2 0 1 8 2 0 1 9 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 1 2 0 2 2 2 0 2 3
2 Monetary policy in restrictive territory
In 2023 the ECB stayed the course in raising key policy interest rates to, and
keeping them at, levels sufficiently restrictive to ensure a timely return of inflation to
the 2% medium-term target. In the first nine months of the year it increased rates by
200 basis points, bringing the deposit facility rate to 4%, as exceptionally high
inflationary pressure stemming from high energy costs spread through the economy.
High food prices were also a significant contributing factor. In addition, the effects of
supply bottlenecks and of pent-up demand linked to the lifting of pandemic-related
restrictions were, although easing, still driving up prices, and wage growth picked up.
The ECB’s decisions reflected a data-dependent approach and were based on the
assessment of the medium-term inflation outlook in light of the incoming economic
and financial data, the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary
policy transmission. In the course of the year the available information increasingly
showed that the tightening of monetary policy was being forcefully transmitted to the
economy. In addition, incoming inflation data indicated that the disinflation process,
as signalled especially by the decline in measures of underlying inflation, continued
to make progress. Ultimately the Governing Council decided at its October and
December meetings to keep the key ECB interest rates unchanged.
The Eurosystem balance sheet continued to contract as part of the monetary policy
normalisation that began in 2022, notwithstanding the additional €45 billion
contribution from Hrvatska narodna banka’s balance sheet following the adoption of
the euro by Croatia on 1 January 2023. The Eurosystem balance sheet reached €6.9
trillion by year-end, a decline of more than €1 trillion in one year and of almost €2
trillion when compared with its peak in mid-2022. The reduction was mainly the result
of the maturing and early repayments of long-term funds borrowed by banks under
the third series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO III) and was
supported by the end of both the full and the partial reinvestment phase in the asset
purchase programme (APP), in the periods starting in March and July respectively.
In December 2023 the Governing Council decided to advance the normalisation of
the Eurosystem balance sheet, expressing its intention to gradually phase out
reinvestments under the pandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP) starting
in July 2024. In 2023, following the announcement of December 2022, the
Eurosystem worked on the review of its operational framework for steering short-
term interest rates, which was concluded in March 2024.
Moreover, the ECB proceeded in 2023 with the gradual removal, initiated in 2022, of
its pandemic-related collateral easing measures, and the Hellenic Republic’s credit
rating was upgraded to investment grade level. Throughout 2023 the Eurosystem
emphasised risk management to ensure efficient policy implementation, including by
diversifying the credit assessment sources it accepts. With the key interest rates
having been raised to bring down inflation, the ECB incurred losses from negative
interest income, which were partly offset by previously established financial buffers.
The monetary income of the ECB is expected to increase again in the future, which
will support its operational effectiveness.
ECB Annual Report 2023 28
2.1 Pursuing a restrictive monetary policy to bring inflation
back to the 2% target
Inflation was still 8.6% in January, In early 2023 economic growth stagnated in the euro area, after a marked
while the economy remained
deceleration since mid-2022. However, the economy showed signs of resilience in
resilient despite mounting
challenges the face of significant challenges from subdued global economic activity, geopolitical
uncertainties owing to Russia’s war against Ukraine and high inflation along with
tighter financing conditions. Headline inflation declined in January as a result of
lower energy prices but remained high at 8.6%, also in light of high food prices. This
was partly due to the pervasive impact of high energy costs across the economy,
which also influenced food prices, alongside ongoing – although fading – pandemic-
related factors such as supply chain disruptions and pent-up demand. Wage growth
was also picking up.
The Governing Council raised rates In light of the medium-term inflation outlook, the Governing Council reaffirmed its
in February and expressed its
intention to pursue a restrictive monetary policy and raised the three key ECB
intention to raise them further
interest rates by 50 basis points at its February meeting. It also said that it intended
to raise interest rates by another 50 basis points at its meeting in March, and would
then evaluate the subsequent monetary policy path. The Governing Council
remained steadfast in raising interest rates at a steady pace to levels sufficiently
restrictive to ensure a timely return of inflation to its 2% medium-term target. Keeping
interest rates at restrictive levels should gradually reduce inflation by dampening
demand and pre-empting any sustained upward shift in inflation expectations.
At its February meeting, the Governing Council also established modalities for
reducing Eurosystem securities holdings under the APP. This followed on from its
December 2022 decision to no longer reinvest the principal payments from maturing
securities in full from March onwards, so that the APP portfolio would decrease by a
monthly average of €15 billion from March to June 2023, with the subsequent
reduction pace to be determined later. Corporate bond reinvestments would be tilted
more strongly towards issuers with a better climate performance. While maintaining
a focus on the ECB’s price stability objective, this strategy was aimed at taking better
account of climate-related financial risk in the Eurosystem balance sheet and
gradually decarbonising corporate bond holdings in alignment with the ECB’s
secondary objective of supporting the general economic policies in the EU, which
include efforts to mitigate the impact of climate change (see Box 8).
US banking sector turbulence In March, amid the banking sector turbulence in the United States and Switzerland,
fuelled uncertainty in Europe,
financial market tensions soared and increased uncertainty about the outlook for
emphasising the need for a data-
dependent approach to rate euro area growth and inflation. In addition, the March ECB staff macroeconomic
decisions
projections foresaw sustained high inflation levels, particularly in inflation excluding
energy and food, although inflation was expected to decrease in the coming years.
With inflation projected to remain too high for too long, the Governing Council
decided to raise the three key ECB interest rates by 50 basis points. Moreover, the
heightened uncertainty emphasised the importance of a data-dependent approach to
the Governing Council’s policy rate decisions. It therefore also clarified its “reaction
function”, explaining that its policy rate decisions would be guided by three criteria:
the inflation outlook in light of incoming economic and financial data, the dynamics of
ECB Annual Report 2023 29
underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. The Governing
Council also continued to monitor market tensions closely, standing ready to respond
as necessary to preserve price stability and contribute to financial stability in the euro
area. In the following months, the euro area banking sector proved resilient to the
tensions emanating from outside the euro area.
It became increasingly evident that As the year advanced, it was increasingly evident that the Governing Council’s
restrictive monetary policy was
restrictive interest rate policy was having a significant impact on the economy. Past
having a significant impact on euro
area financing conditions rate increases were being transmitted forcefully to euro area monetary and financing
conditions – the initial stages of the transmission mechanism – and were gradually
having effects across the economy, even though the lags and strength of
transmission to the real economy remained uncertain. In April borrowing rates for
businesses and mortgages reached their highest levels in over a decade. The
resultant decline in credit demand, along with tighter credit standards, led to a
progressive slowdown in loan growth. Banks also repaid the largest amount of funds
borrowed under TLTRO III in June, causing a significant decline in excess liquidity.
This reduction did not hinder the smooth transmission of monetary policy rate
changes to risk-free rates in money markets, although an asymmetry emerged in the
reaction of the spread between the euro short-term rate (€STR) and the ECB’s
deposit facility rate. The spread did not narrow with the liquidity reduction, in contrast
to its widening when liquidity had increased (see Box 3).
The Governing Council continued to Headline inflation declined markedly. It dropped to 6.1% in May from 8.5% in
raise policy rates as underlying
February, with 6.9% in March and 7.0% in April. Nevertheless, while inflation was
price pressures remained high…
expected to decline further toward the target, largely driven by the concurrent
tightening of financing conditions that was increasingly dampening demand, price
pressures were still anticipated to remain too strong for too long. The Governing
Council therefore opted for another two consecutive 25 basis point interest rate
increases, in May and June respectively.
…stopped APP reinvestments as of After the pace of reinvestment was reduced in March, July marked the end of APP
July…
reinvestments. Reinvestments under PEPP were still set to continue until at least the
end of 2024. At the same time, developments since the Governing Council’s
previous monetary policy meeting supported its expectation that inflation would drop
further over the remainder of the year but stay above target for an extended period.
On this basis, the Governing Council stayed on course to raise interest rates by an
additional 25 basis points in July.
…and returned minimum reserve The Governing Council also decided in July to reduce the remuneration of minimum
remuneration to 0%, improving
reserves from the deposit facility rate to 0%. This decision was aimed at maintaining
policy efficiency
the effectiveness of monetary policy by retaining control over the monetary policy
stance while ensuring a full pass-through of interest rate decisions to money
markets. It also enhanced policy efficiency by reducing overall interest expenses
stemming from reserves while achieving the same degree of monetary restriction.
ECB Annual Report 2023 30
With inflation in August showing almost no progress from the 5.3% recorded in July,
and the inflation outlook in the September ECB staff projections revised upwards for
2023 and 2024, mainly owing to a higher path for energy prices, the Governing
Council increased the key ECB rates by another 25 basis points at its September
meeting. This brought the cumulative increase over 2023 to 200 basis points and the
deposit facility rate to 4% (Chart 2.1).
Chart 2.1
Changes in the key ECB policy rates
(percentage points)
Source: ECB.
…and said that maintaining current However, the economy was expected to remain subdued in the following months,
policy rate levels for a sufficiently
after having stagnated over the first half of the year. The increasing impact of the
long duration would contribute
substantially to the timely return of Governing Council’s tightening measures on domestic demand, coupled with a
inflation to the target
challenging international trade environment, led ECB staff to significantly lower their
economic growth projections in September 2023. Additionally, while underlying price
pressures persisted at high levels, most indicators started to ease, and the projected
path for inflation excluding energy and food was also revised slightly downwards. On
the basis of this updated assessment, the Governing Council also considered that
the key ECB interest rates had reached levels that, maintained for a sufficiently long
duration, would make a substantial contribution to the timely return of inflation to its
target.
October ended the longest period of After ten consecutive rate hikes, the Governing Council decided at its October
consecutive rate hikes in the history
meeting to keep the key ECB interest rates unchanged. From the start of the rate
of the euro
increases in July 2022, the ECB had raised the deposit facility rate from -0.50% to
4% by September 2023. While inflation was still anticipated to remain persistently
high owing to robust domestic price pressures, it continued to decrease significantly
in September, dropping to 4.3%. This decline was accompanied by an easing in
measures of underlying inflation. The increased geopolitical risks arising from
October onwards from the conflict in the Middle East also further underscored the
importance of the Governing Council's data-dependent approach to determining the
appropriate level and duration of restriction in its key policy rates.
ECB Annual Report 2023 31
Inflation dropped to 2.4% in As the year came to a close, inflation continued to decrease, reaching 2.4% in
November
November. At its December meeting, however, the Governing Council assessed that
it was likely to temporarily rise again in the near term, owing to base effects.
Underlying inflation had eased further. The Eurosystem staff macroeconomic
projections suggested that inflation would resume its gradual decline in 2024. At the
same time domestic price pressures were seen as remaining elevated, primarily
owing to strong growth in unit labour costs.
The Governing Council kept rates Against this background, the Governing Council decided at its December meeting to
unchanged and decided to advance
keep its key rates unchanged.
the Eurosystem’s balance sheet
normalisation
The Governing Council also decided in December to advance the normalisation of
the Eurosystem balance sheet. It expressed the intention to reinvest, in full, the
principal payments from maturing PEPP securities until mid-2024, before reducing
the portfolio by an average €7.5 billion per month until year-end and discontinuing
reinvestments thereafter.
2.2 Eurosystem balance sheet developments as monetary
policy tightens further
The Eurosystem balance sheet was In 2023 the Eurosystem balance sheet continued the gradual reduction started in
gradually reduced, with the end of
2022 with the normalisation of monetary policy. It declined further as the full and
APP reinvestments and the
maturing of TLTRO III operations partial reinvestment phases of the APP ended in February and June respectively.
Under the PEPP, the Eurosystem continued full reinvestments throughout the year.
By the end of 2023 the balance sheet had declined to €6.9 trillion, mainly on account
of TLTRO III operations maturing as well as early repayments, and to some extent
also as the APP portfolio began to be wound down.
At the end of 2023 monetary policy-related assets on the Eurosystem balance sheet
amounted to €5.1 trillion, a decline of €1.2 trillion compared with the end of 2022.
Loans to euro area credit institutions accounted for 6% of total assets (down from
17% at the end of 2022) and assets purchased for monetary policy purposes
represented 68% of total assets (up from 62% at the end of 2022). Other financial
assets on the balance sheet consisted mainly of foreign currency-denominated
assets, gold and euro-denominated non-monetary policy portfolios.
On the liabilities side, the overall amount of credit institutions’ reserve holdings and
recourse to the deposit facility decreased to €3.5 trillion at the end of 2023 (from €4.0
trillion at the end of 2022) and represented 51% of total liabilities (compared with
50% at the end of 2022). Banknotes in circulation were virtually unchanged at €1.6
trillion and accounted for 23% of total liabilities (up from 20%).
In 2023, following the announcement of December 2022, the Eurosystem worked on
the review of its operational framework for steering short-term interest rates, which
was concluded in March 2024.
ECB Annual Report 2023 32
Chart 2.2
Evolution of the Eurosystem’s consolidated balance sheet
(EUR billions)
Source: ECB.
Notes: Positive figures refer to assets and negative figures to liabilities. The line for excess liquidity is presented as a positive figure,
although it refers to the sum of the following liability items: current account holdings in excess of reserve requirements and recourse to
the deposit facility.
The adoption of the euro by Croatia on 1 January 2023 and the inclusion of Hrvatska
narodna banka’s balance sheet in the consolidated balance sheet of the Eurosystem
increased the latter’s total assets and liabilities by €45 billion.
APP and PEPP portfolio distribution across asset classes and
jurisdictions
The run-off of the asset purchase The APP comprises four asset purchase programmes: the third covered bond
programmes was well absorbed by
purchase programme (CBPP3), the asset-backed securities purchase programme
the market
(ABSPP), the public sector purchase programme (PSPP) and the corporate sector
purchase programme (CSPP). The PEPP was introduced in 2020 in response to the
pandemic. All asset categories eligible under the APP are also eligible under the
PEPP; a waiver of the eligibility requirements was temporarily granted for the PEPP
for securities issued by the Hellenic Republic.25
In December 2021 the Governing Council confirmed its intention to gradually start
the normalisation of its monetary policy, by reducing the pace at which it purchased
securities for the PEPP and, subsequently, the APP. It announced the end of net
asset purchases under the PEPP, and in March 2022 gave an expected end date for
the net purchases under the APP. The Eurosystem ended net purchases under the
PEPP as of 1 April 2022 and continued to reinvest (in full) the principal payments
from maturing securities purchased under the programme. It ended net purchases
25 The waiver was granted at the inception of the PEPP and was in place until September 2023. In that
month, the relevant credit rating was upgraded to investment grade level, and the waiver was
consequently no longer needed.
ECB Annual Report 2023 33
under the APP as of 1 July 2022 and began to only reinvest (in full) the principal
payments from maturing securities. It then decided to reduce the Eurosystem
holdings under the APP at a measured and predictable pace through partial
reinvestment of the principal payments from maturing securities between March and
June 2023, thereby ensuring that the Eurosystem maintained a continuous market
presence under the APP over this period. Finally, the Governing Council
confirmed on 15 June 2023 that it would discontinue reinvestments under the APP
as of July 2023. For the PEPP, full reinvestments were continued till the end of 2022
and throughout 2023. On 14 December 2023 the Governing Council announced its
intention to continue to reinvest, in full, the principal payments from maturing
securities purchased under the PEPP during the first half of 2024 and reduce the
PEPP portfolio by €7.5 billion per month on average over the second half of 2024,
before discontinuing reinvestments under the PEPP at the end of that year.
Reinvestment purchases continued to be conducted in a smooth manner and in line
with the respective prevailing market conditions.
The size of the APP portfolio remained stable during the full reinvestment phase
from July 2022 to February 2023. During the partial reinvestment phase, from March
to June 2023, it declined by €60 billion, at an average pace of €15 billion per month,
before the full run-off started in July 2023. Overall, APP holdings declined from
€3.254 trillion (at amortised cost) at the end of 2022 to €3.026 trillion at the end of
2023. The PSPP accounted for the bulk of these holdings, with €2.403 trillion or 79%
of total APP holdings at the end of the year. Under the PSPP, redemptions were in
general reinvested in the jurisdiction in which principal repayments fell due. In
addition, some national central banks purchased securities issued by EU
supranational institutions. The weighted average maturity of the PSPP holdings
stood at 7.0 years at the end of 2023, with some variation across jurisdictions. The
ABSPP accounted for less than 1% (€13 billion) of total APP holdings at year-end,
the CBPP3 for 9% (€286 billion) and the CSPP for 11% (€324 billion). Corporate and
covered bond purchases were guided by benchmarks reflecting the market
capitalisation of all eligible outstanding corporate and covered bonds respectively.
The Eurosystem continued to tilt its corporate securities purchases towards issuers
with a better climate performance and published its first climate-related financial
disclosures for the corporate securities holdings under the CSPP and PEPP, as well
as for its non-monetary policy portfolios – see Section 11.5. Securities purchases
under the APP were implemented smoothly throughout the first half of 2023. The
partial reinvestment phase and the discontinuation of the purchases were well
absorbed by the financial markets and did not cause any major disturbance.
At the end of 2023 PEPP holdings amounted to €1.7 trillion (at amortised cost).
Covered bond holdings accounted for less than 1% (€6 billion) of the total, corporate
sector holdings for 3% (€46 billion) and public sector holdings for 97% (€1,614
billion).26 The weighted average maturity of the PEPP public sector securities
holdings stood at 7.3 years at the end of 2023, with some differences across
jurisdictions.
26 The total exceeds 100% as a result of rounding.
ECB Annual Report 2023 34
Redemptions of private sector securities under the APP and PEPP amounted to €80
billion in 2023, while redemptions of public sector securities under the PSPP and
PEPP amounted to €438 billion. Reinvestments under the APP and PEPP amounted
to €36 billion for private sector securities and €271 billion for public sector securities.
Given the large and unevenly distributed redemptions, the public sector
reinvestments were smoothed across jurisdictions and across time to ensure a
regular and balanced market presence, giving due regard to market price formation
and market functioning considerations. This smoothing mechanism led to additional
temporary deviations of the PEPP holdings from the allocation in accordance with
the Eurosystem capital key, but these were largely reversed by the end of the
smoothing period, which is the calendar year in which the redemptions take place.
The assets purchased under the PSPP, CSPP, CBPP3 and PEPP continued to be
made available for securities lending to support bond and repo market liquidity. In
2023 repo market conditions improved significantly compared with the previous year,
which was reflected in smaller lending volumes.
Developments in Eurosystem refinancing operations
At the end of 2023 the outstanding amount of Eurosystem refinancing operations
was €410 billion, representing a decline of €914 billion compared with the end of
2022. This change mainly reflects voluntary early repayments (€312.5 billion) and
the maturing of operations (€612.9 billion) under the TLTRO III series. The weighted
average maturity of outstanding Eurosystem refinancing operations decreased from
around 10.5 months at the end of 2022 to 5.2 months at the end of 2023.
Gradual phasing-out of pandemic collateral easing measures
In March 2022 the ECB announced the gradual phasing-out of pandemic-related
collateral easing measures. These measures were a core element of the ECB’s
monetary policy response to the pandemic, making it easier for counterparties to
access Eurosystem credit operations by increasing the volume of eligible collateral.
The central focus of the measures was a temporary reduction in valuation haircuts
across all asset classes by a fixed factor of 20% and temporary extensions to the
additional credit claim (ACC) frameworks implemented by some national central
banks.
The gradual phase-out started in July 2022. In a second step, which took effect from
29 June 2023, the temporary reduction in valuation haircuts for marketable and non-
marketable assets was fully phased out by implementing a new haircut schedule,
thus marking the return to the ECB’s pre-pandemic risk tolerance level for credit
operations.27
27 The date of entry into force took into account the date of the TLTRO III operation which matured in
June.
ECB Annual Report 2023 35
A third step in the phasing-out of the pandemic collateral easing measures will be a
comprehensive review of the ACC framework. Some national central banks
terminated their national ACC frameworks in full or in part in the course of 2023 or
before.28 In November 2023, the ECB announced the discontinuation of the eligibility
of short-term debt instruments for use as collateral under the Guideline on temporary
collateral measures29, as well as of some specific features of the ACC frameworks.
In addition, it decided to reinstate the €25,000 minimum size for domestic credit
claims accepted as collateral for domestic use, as well as to extend the validity of the
ACC frameworks with their remaining features, until at least the end of 2024. These
decisions are to be implemented in the course of 2024.
In September 2023 the relevant credit rating of the Hellenic Republic was upgraded
from credit quality step 4 to step 3 on the Eurosystem’s harmonised rating scale
(from BB+ to BBB-), positioning all debt instruments issued by the central
government of the Hellenic Republic at investment grade level.30 The debt
instruments issued by the central government of the Hellenic Republic, which
previously benefited from a waiver included in the Guideline on temporary collateral
measures, are therefore as of September 2023 subject to the eligibility criteria under
the general collateral framework.
Developments in eligible marketable assets and mobilised
collateral
The nominal amount of eligible marketable assets increased by €1.2 trillion in 2023,
reaching a level of €18.3 trillion at the end of the year (Chart 2.3). Central
government securities continued to be the largest asset class (€9.9 trillion). Other
asset classes included corporate bonds (€1.9 trillion), covered bank bonds (€1.8
trillion) and unsecured bank bonds (€2 trillion). Regional government securities
(€603 billion), asset-backed securities (€600 billion) and other marketable assets
(€1.4 trillion) each accounted for a comparatively small fraction of the eligible assets
universe.
28 The impact on collateral of terminating elements of ACC frameworks was especially considerable for
Spain, France and Portugal.
29 Guideline of the European Central Bank of 9 July 2014 on additional temporary measures relating to
Eurosystem refinancing operations and eligibility of collateral and amending Guideline ECB/2007/9
(ECB/2014/31)(OJ L 240, 13.8.2014, p. 28).
30 For an assessment of the financial and economic effects the upgrade to investment grade is expected
to have on the Greek economy, see Anastasatou, M., Balfoussia, H., Bragoudakis, Z., Malliaropulos,
D., Migiakis, P., Papageorgiou, D. and Petroulas, P., “Effects of a sovereign credit rating upgrade to
investment grade on the Greek economy”, Economic Bulletin, No 58, Bank of Greece, 2023, pp. 7-28.
ECB Annual Report 2023 36
Chart 2.3
Developments in eligible marketable assets
(EUR billions)
Source: ECB.
Notes: Asset values are nominal amounts. The chart shows averages of end-of-month data for each period.
Between the adjustment of the interest rates applicable to TLTRO III in November
2022 and the end of 2023, counterparties repaid 80% of their outstanding credit,
which was accompanied by a sizable reduction in mobilised collateral of more than
€900 billion (Chart 2.4). Following the early repayments between November 2022
and January 2023, counterparties demobilised in particular government bonds,
which have a relatively high opportunity cost and can be used in private repo
funding. In addition, they demobilised more than €250 billion of covered bonds and
asset-backed securities in the course of 2023. The maturity of the TLTRO III
operation in June 2023 was also accompanied by a large reduction in mobilised
collateral (around €300 billion), which corresponded to 60% of the net credit repaid
on that day. However, two-thirds of that drop in mobilised collateral was due to the
partial phasing-out of the pandemic collateral easing measures, in particular the
phasing-out of certain pools of ACCs in France as well as the reversal of the
remaining 10% haircut reduction.
ECB Annual Report 2023 37
Chart 2.4
Developments in mobilised collateral
(EUR billions)
Source: ECB.
For collateral, the averages of end-of-month data for each period are shown, and values are after valuation and haircuts. For
outstanding credit, daily data are used.
2.3 Managing financial risks of monetary policy instruments
The Eurosystem continuously manages the financial risks inherent in the
implementation of its monetary policy operations. Its risk management function
endeavours to attain risk efficiency, i.e. to achieve monetary policy objectives with
the lowest amount of risk.31
Losses arose because of interest The ECB increased its key interest rates several times in 2023 to bring inflation back
rate sensitivity mismatches
to the Governing Council’s medium-term target of 2%. This increased the cost of the
between assets and liabilities
liabilities on the balance sheets of Eurosystem central banks, while the income
generated on their APP and PEPP securities portfolios and TLTRO III remained low.
This resulted in negative interest income, which can be partly offset against financial
buffers built up in previous years. If these buffers are fully utilised, any remaining
losses are recorded on the balance sheets. However, such losses can be offset with
future profits and do not affect the ability of Eurosystem central banks to operate
effectively. Over time, the Eurosystem’s asset-liability mismatch is expected to
decrease, which will improve its profit and loss accounts.32
The main changes to the Eurosystem’s risk management framework in 2023 were a
further diversification of its credit assessment sources and a stronger tilting of
purchases of corporate sector securities towards issuers with a better climate
performance.
31 See “The financial risk management of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy operations”, ECB, July 2015.
32 See the explainer “Profits and losses of the ECB and the euro area national central banks: where do
they come from?”, ECB, updated on 19 May 2023.
ECB Annual Report 2023 38
Further diversification of credit assessment sources
2023 was marked by the acceptance of additional credit assessment sources within
the Eurosystem Credit Assessment Framework (ECAF). The ECAF is a risk
management framework employed by the Eurosystem to mitigate the credit risk of
assets used in monetary policy operations. It defines the procedures, rules and
techniques that ensure the Eurosystem requirement of high credit standards for all
eligible assets is met on an ongoing basis. This involves the assessment,
acceptance and monitoring of different types of credit assessment source.
The Bank of Greece’s in-house In April 2023 the Governing Council decided to accept the Bank of Greece’s in-
credit assessment system was
house credit assessment system, which provides assessments of Greek legal
accepted as a credit assessment
source entities in the non-financial sector, as a credit assessment source. These
assessments can now be used to determine the eligibility of credit claims on Greek
non-financial corporations as collateral for Eurosystem credit operations, and
valuation haircuts for them. The Bank of Greece’s in-house assessment system is
one of nine national central bank credit assessment systems currently accepted by
the Governing Council.
Scope Ratings GmbH was In November the Governing Council decided to accept Scope Ratings GmbH as an
accepted as a new external credit
external credit assessment institution (ECAI), following a thorough Eurosystem
rating agency
assessment of the company’s application based on the Eurosystem’s acceptance
criteria for ECAIs. The assessment encompassed quantitative and qualitative
criteria, as well as any relevant supervisory feedback from the European Securities
and Markets Authority. The ratings provided by Scope Ratings will be used together
with the ratings of the already accepted ECAIs (DBRS Morningstar, Fitch Ratings,
Moody’s and S&P Global Ratings) to determine the eligibility of collateral assets for
monetary policy operations, and the valuation haircuts to be applied, once the
process of integrating Scope Ratings into the Eurosystem IT infrastructure has been
concluded.
Managing risks of the asset purchases in the APP and PEPP
Financial risks of asset purchases In 2023 reinvestment of principal payments from maturing securities continued to be
continued to be managed on the
conducted for monetary policy purposes under the PEPP and, until the end of June,
basis of specific risk control
frameworks for each asset class also under the APP. The financial risks of these programmes are managed on the
basis of specific financial risk control frameworks that take into account each
programme’s policy objectives and the features and risk profiles of the different asset
types purchased. The frameworks consist of eligibility criteria, credit risk
assessments and due diligence procedures, pricing frameworks, benchmarks and
limits. They applied to net asset purchases and continue to apply to the reinvestment
of principal payments from maturing holdings, as well as to the holdings for as long
as they remain on the Eurosystem’s balance sheet. The key elements of these
frameworks, as summarised in Section 2.3 of the ECB’s Annual Report 2022, Table
2.1, are still valid. For corporate sector securities, the Eurosystem applied a stronger
tilting of its reinvestments of principal payments from maturing securities towards
ECB Annual Report 2023 39
issuers with a better climate performance as of the start of partial reinvestment under
the APP in March 2023.
Box 3
The evolution of excess liquidity and its impact on the euro unsecured market rate
This box explores the repercussions of the reduction in the Eurosystem balance sheet on the euro
money market. The decline in excess liquidity resulting from the balance sheet reduction has not
disrupted the pass-through of changes in the key ECB interest rates to unsecured money market
rates. However, an asymmetry emerged in 2023 in the reaction of the spread between the euro
short-term rate (€STR) and the ECB’s deposit facility rate, which has been less responsive to the
reabsorption of excess liquidity than to the earlier injection of liquidity. Preliminary analysis suggests
that this phenomenon is likely to be temporary.
The new monetary policy tightening reduced liquidity
Since the deposit facility rate was no longer negative and as a result of the recalibration of the
conditions for TLTRO III, excess liquidity declined from €4.4 trillion on 27 July 2022 to €3.3 trillion on
31 December 2023 (Chart A, panel a). The €1.1 trillion reduction occurred primarily through the
repayment of €1.7 trillion which had been borrowed by banks under TLTRO III. The maturing of
Eurosystem APP holdings also contributed to this decline, with redemptions that were not
reinvested absorbing €0.3 trillion. Conversely, the evolution of autonomous factors released
€0.9 trillion of excess liquidity back into the system, reflecting a reduction in institutional customers’
non-monetary policy deposits with the Eurosystem. This reduction took place in a gradual manner,
after adjustments were made in the remuneration of these deposits.
Lower liquidity has not narrowed the spread between the €STR and the deposit facility rate
Historical data suggests that a significant decline in excess liquidity should result in a narrowing of
the spread between the €STR and the deposit facility rate. However, the recent reduction in excess
liquidity has not led to a compression of this spread (Chart A, panel b), which widened until the
second half of 2022 and then stabilised at around -10 basis points from November 2022 onwards.
This departure from historical patterns raises questions about whether it is a temporary
phenomenon or a structural shift.
ECB Annual Report 2023 40
Chart A
Evolution of excess liquidity
a)Excess liquidity and components b)Excess liquidity and the €STR/deposit facility rate
spread
(EUR trillions) (x-axis: excess liquidity in EUR trillions; y-axis: spread in basis points)
Sources: ECB (market operations database), Bloomberg and Eurosystem calculations.
Note: Panel a): the negative deposit facility rate period ends on 26 July 2022, with the rate moving from -0.50% to 0.00% on 27 July. Panel b): the negative
deposit facility rate period (covered by this chart) is from 1 October 2019 to 26 July 2022. The zero deposit facility rate period is from 27 July to 13 September
2022. The positive deposit facility rate period starts on 14 September 2022, when the rate was increased from 0.00% to 0.75%.
Drivers
The effective deactivation of the two-tier system for the remuneration of banks’ excess reserves in
July 2022 resulted in an additional €1 trillion of excess liquidity becoming available for trading
(Chart B, panel a). During the period of negative rates and following the introduction of the two-tier
system in October 2019, excess liquidity effectively available for trading was lower than the
headline figure for excess liquidity, as part of the excess liquidity held with the Eurosystem
benefited from a favourable remuneration, i.e. it was exempt from negative interest rates. The end
of negative policy rates in July 2022 eliminated this advantage. The release of additional tradable
funds bolstered, among other things, banks’ trading in unsecured overnight deposits.
According to the money market statistical reporting (MMSR) dataset, unsecured borrowing rose
from a daily average of €120 billion during the negative deposit facility rate period in 2021 and 2022
to €210 billion towards the end of 2023, with the increase involving all counterparty sectors (Chart
B, panel b). The return to positive rates and the end of the two-tier system thus led to a notable
increase in supply in the unsecured segment.
In a context of excess supply, banks benefited from greater market power in the negotiation of
interest rates with customers, as evident in the greater dispersion of rates in their contributions to
the calculation of the €STR, with the majority tilting the rate down. While investors supplying funds
preferred short maturities since they expected the ECB to raise interest rates, banks had limited
appetite for short maturities, which do not provide benefits for regulatory liquidity metrics while
being a costly way to increase total balance sheet size. Banks therefore tend to charge a premium
to depositors to compensate for the negative effect of such deposits on their leverage ratio. The
ECB Annual Report 2023 41
premium resulted in downward pressure on the €STR, particularly at quarter and year-end reporting
dates.
Chart B
Trading activity
a)Tradable excess liquidity and the €STR/deposit b)Unsecured borrowing by counterparty sector
facility rate spread
(left-hand scale: excess liquidity in EUR trillions; right-hand scale: spread in (EUR billions)
basis points)
Sources: ECB (market operations database, MMSR), Bloomberg and Eurosystem calculations.
Note: Panel a): the negative deposit facility rate period ends on 26 July 2022, with the rate moving from -0.50% to 0.00% on 27 July. “Exempt reserves” refers
to the portion of excess liquidity exempt from negative remuneration under the two-tier system. Panel b): the positive deposit facility rate period starts on 14
September 2022, when the rate was increased from 0.00% to 0.75%. The turnover reflected in the chart includes all €STR overnight deposits, deposits from
non-financial corporations, call accounts and some other residual borrowing with maturities up to one year. MMFs: money market funds; NFCs: non-financial
corporations. “Other” includes investment funds (excluding money market funds), pension funds and insurance funds, and residual sectors.
The uncompressed spread may be a temporary phenomenon
In conclusion, the absence of a compression of the spread between the €STR and the deposit
facility rate could be a temporary phenomenon as, in a context of excess supply, banks retain
market power to negotiate the price of short-term deposits to cover effects on regulatory ratios. A
realignment of the €STR and deposit facility rate may still occur, as excess liquidity levels will
decline further, which could change the balance of power between cash demand and supply.
ECB Annual Report 2023 42
3 European financial sector: resilient but
operating in a fragile financial stability
environment
Banks in the euro area proved to be resilient in 2023, particularly in the face of bank
failures in the United States and Switzerland. They benefited from progress made on
several fronts, along with continued supervisory engagement. The financial stability
environment nonetheless remained fragile as tighter financial conditions challenged
the real economy and the financial sector. National authorities continued to
implement or tighten macroprudential buffers in order to enhance the strength of the
banking sector. Moreover, the regulatory frameworks for banks, as well as for
financial infrastructure and innovations, were further improved to increase the long-
term resilience of the financial system.
3.1 The financial stability environment in 2023
The financial stability environment The financial stability environment in the euro area remained fragile throughout
in the euro area remained fragile
2023, reflecting a combination of challenges related to high inflation, tighter financial
conditions, weaker growth prospects and fresh geopolitical tensions in the Middle
East adding to the impact of Russia’s ongoing war against Ukraine. In March 2023
bank failures in the United States and Switzerland triggered a financial shock which
was potent but ultimately short-lived, owing to resolute policy action that resulted in
financial stability concerns quickly shifting towards other challenges, such as the
implications of higher interest rates and downside risks to growth. Rising ECB policy
rates continued to gradually drive up funding costs for all sectors of the economy.
However, the lengthening of interest rate fixation periods for loans granted in
previous years, alongside resilient labour markets and accumulated savings, muted
the credit risk implications of higher borrowing costs for borrowers throughout the
year. Overall, asset quality of euro area banks remained robust but bank loan losses
started to rise, albeit from low levels, and non-bank financial intermediation (NBFI)
entities continued to face elevated credit risk associated with higher numbers of
rating downgrades in their bond portfolios.
Tighter financial conditions and Euro area sovereigns, having locked in low interest rates in previous years and
higher debt servicing costs for
against the backdrop of the ECB’s Transmission Protection Instrument, saw a broad-
households, firms and governments
based increase in funding costs in 2023, with limited dispersion across countries
over the year. However, as governments are faced with having to roll over maturing
debt at higher interest rates, their funding costs remain sensitive to the evolution of
fiscal fundamentals, notably the risk of fiscal slippage, which could reignite sovereign
debt sustainability concerns. At the same time, any unwarranted, disorderly
sovereign debt market dynamics can be countered by flexibility in the ECB’s
pandemic emergency purchase programme reinvestments and by the ECB’s
Transmission Protection Instrument, if the necessary conditions are fulfilled.
ECB Annual Report 2023 43
Similarly, prior to and during the pandemic, the corporate sector benefited from low
interest rates and its earnings held up well in 2023. As the effects of the recovery
faded, credit conditions tightened and debt servicing costs went up, corporate
vulnerabilities increased. Although generally still low, there was a nascent rise in
corporate failures during the year. Real estate firms were particularly vulnerable
owing to the ongoing downturn in euro area commercial property market.
The household sector was faced with a deterioration in debt servicing capacity in
2023, owing to rising interest rates and the ongoing correction in residential property
markets. The steep increase in borrowing costs from the beginning of the monetary
policy tightening cycle clearly had a negative impact on mortgage demand. That
notwithstanding, a strong labour market alongside housing supply constraints
underpinned an orderly cooling in residential real estate markets. Nevertheless, still
elevated valuations suggest that vulnerabilities could materialise if price corrections
become disorderly.
Financial markets remained Looking through several episodes of volatility in 2023, the overall pricing in financial
vulnerable to negative surprises
markets during the year appeared to be predicated on optimistic expectations about
the future macro-financial outlook and was therefore considered to be vulnerable to
negative surprises. While risk premia in the corporate bond market seemed to be
well aligned with historical patterns, they were significantly compressed in the equity
market. The unusually modest reaction of stock prices to rising interest rates was
seen as rendering equities vulnerable to abrupt repricing if the adverse effects of the
economic slowdown on corporate profitability turned out to be greater than
anticipated by investors. Furthermore, market risk sentiment remained highly
sensitive to further surprises regarding the outlook for inflation, growth and, by
extension, the path of monetary policy.
The Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) ratio of euro area banks stood at 15.6% in the
third quarter of 2023. This was close to its highest level since the start of European
banking supervision and reflected the higher profitability and de-risking of bank
portfolios. Strong capital and liquidity buffers helped to preserve trust in the euro
area banking system during the tensions triggered by bank failures in the United
States and Switzerland early in the year. In addition, euro area banks’ return on
equity increased further to 10.0%, its highest level in more than a decade, driven by
wider net interest margins as yields on assets rose faster than the cost of funding.
While bank earnings benefited from these tailwinds, they were likely at risk from
three headwinds: (i) the combination of higher inflation, rising debt servicing costs
and a deteriorating macroeconomic environment potentially having an adverse
impact on bank asset quality, which had already started to materialise with initial
signs of rising default rates and payment arrears; (ii) tighter credit standards
reducing demand for loans, and flows of new lending declining to their lowest levels
since 2015; and (iii) funding costs appearing set to rise, as aggregate deposit rates
began to inch up – notably for term deposits – and market funding costs started to
become more expensive. Notwithstanding these challenges, the results of the 2023
EU-wide stress test conducted by the European Banking Authority (EBA) confirmed
that banks could be expected to remain resilient to severely adverse shocks.
ECB Annual Report 2023 44
NBFI sector remained vulnerable to The NBFI sector remained relatively stable in 2023, with continued inflows into
liquidity and credit risks
sovereign and investment-grade corporate bond funds. This helped to increase the
absorption of debt issued by sovereigns and corporates. At the same time, NBFI
entities actively reduced their overall credit risk exposure during the year through an
ongoing de-risking process, rebalancing their investment portfolios towards
comparatively safer assets. Nevertheless, they remained vulnerable to credit risk.
Owing to the high level of economic uncertainty and tighter financial conditions, the
NBFI sector was potentially at risk from revaluation losses as a result of rating
downgrades in bond portfolios, as well as from defaults. It also continued to be
exposed to liquidity risk, with cash buffers in equity and bond funds remaining low in
the context of tightening financial conditions. Overall, as liquidity holdings across the
segments of the NBFI sector remained subdued, there was the risk that sudden
investment fund outflows, large margin calls or lapsing insurance policies would lead
to forced asset sales. Real estate investment funds were still particularly exposed to
revaluation losses and investor outflows, especially given the challenges in the
commercial real estate sector. The instability in this segment was particularly
concerning, owing to its importance for the real estate sector and its potential to
amplify risks to that sector.
Euro area banks, funds and insurers continued to face challenges stemming from
climate change in 2023. Cyber risk also required close monitoring. The increasing
frequency of major natural disasters as a result of climate change, and the growing
magnitude of associated losses also pushed up insurance prices amid only limited
availability of insurance against climate-related hazards.33 This underlined the risk of
a greater incidence of climate shocks exacerbating profitability challenges faced by
non-life insurers and widening prevailing protection gaps (the proportion of economic
losses not covered by insurance), with a potential adverse impact on the
macroeconomic situation and financial stability.
3.2 Macroprudential policy: safeguarding financial sector
resilience in turbulent macro-financial conditions
National authorities continued to The ECB has the task of assessing macroprudential capital measures proposed by
implement or tighten
national authorities for banks in countries participating in the Single Supervisory
macroprudential buffers
Mechanism. Importantly, it also has the power to apply more stringent capital
measures if necessary. The ECB’s close monitoring of national macroprudential
policy stances in 2023 did not identify a need for this, as several countries had
already implemented new macroprudential measures or tightened existing ones to
strengthen the resilience of their banking systems to accumulated vulnerabilities and
downside risks.
33 Only 25% of climate-related catastrophe losses are currently insured in the EU. For further details, see
“Policy options to reduce the climate insurance protection gap”, Discussion Paper, ECB and the
European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority, April 2023.
ECB Annual Report 2023 45
Preserving financial system resilience and promoting targeted
macroprudential policy actions
Macroprudential buffers should be In 2023 financial stability concerns shifted towards the implications of higher interest
maintained to preserve banks’
rates and downside risks to growth. From a macroprudential perspective, tighter
resilience in case conditions in the
banking sector deteriorate financial conditions drove a continued downturn in the financial cycle, but systemic
risks did not materialise. Notably, banks’ capital positions remained strong, although
the level of capital headroom varied across banks and countries, and credit supply
constraints were not linked to banks’ capital requirements. Looking ahead, higher
debt servicing costs and a deteriorating macroeconomic environment could
challenge the debt servicing capacity of the non-financial sectors and gradually
impair banks’ asset quality. This, together with lower lending volumes and rising
funding costs, could have a negative impact on banks’ profitability and resilience.
Against this background, national authorities continued to tighten macroprudential
policy 2023 in order to boost the resilience of banks. This was facilitated by banks’
profitability and capital headroom, which remained high on average despite the
challenging macro-financial environment. Some national authorities activated the
countercyclical capital buffer to address vulnerabilities linked to the build-up of credit
risk and to create more macroprudential space in the form of releasable capital
buffers. In 2023 eight countries introduced or tightened the countercyclical buffer,
bringing the total number of countries that had implemented or announced a positive
countercyclical buffer rate to 14 by the end of year. In addition, a total of 11 countries
had implemented or announced either a broad or sectoral systemic risk buffer,34
while banks in ten countries saw an increase in their O-SII buffers, in part owing to
the ECB’s revised floor methodology.35 Finally, 15 countries kept borrower-based
measures in place to prevent banks’ excessive risk-taking in lending to households.
The ECB communicated its analysis and views on macroprudential policy topics in
2023. In the macroprudential policy chapters of the May and November issues of its
Financial Stability Review, it highlighted the importance of preserving
macroprudential buffers in case conditions in the banking sector deteriorate.36 It also
explained why existing borrower-based measures needed to remain in place and
continue to act as structural backstops to ensure that lending standards do not
deteriorate and that borrowers remain resilient. Furthermore, it suggested that high
levels of banking sector profitability could provide an opportunity for some countries
to implement additional targeted increases in macroprudential buffers, provided that
procyclical effects were avoided. Last but not least, the ECB issued opinions
34 By the end of 2023 seven countries had introduced or announced a sectoral systemic risk buffer to
address risks in the residential real estate sector (Belgium, Germany, Lithuania, Malta, Portugal and
Slovenia) and the corporate sector (France).
35 See “Governing Council statement on macroprudential policies”, ECB, December 2022. In addition, in
line with the new floor, higher O-SII buffers became applicable for banks in three countries from 1 January
2024 (Greece, Spain and Italy) and will become applicable in one more country from 1 January 2025
(Slovenia).
36 See “Financial Stability Review”, ECB, May 2023 and “Financial Stability Review”, ECB, November
2023.
ECB Annual Report 2023 46
explaining why imposing extraordinary taxes on credit institutions in some countries
could have negative implications for financial stability.37
Experience from the pandemic The ECB dedicated one issue of its Macroprudential Bulletin to discussing the
suggests that the role of releasable
possible implementation of a positive neutral rate for the countercyclical buffer.
macroprudential buffers should be
enhanced Overall, experience from the pandemic suggests that the role of releasable
macroprudential capital buffers needs to be enhanced to effectively address adverse
systemic shocks that can occur independently of a country’s position in the financial
or economic cycle. By the end of 2023 six countries had already implemented or
announced frameworks for setting a positive neutral rate.38 These frameworks were
based on different approaches, which resulted in varying positive neutral rates. Over
the medium term, a more harmonised approach towards setting positive neutral
rates across banking union countries would seem desirable, as it would enhance
consistency and effective policymaking while allowing for sufficient national flexibility.
With regard to the NBFI sector, the ECB continued to call for a comprehensive set of
policy measures to holistically address vulnerabilities in this sector. These measures
should take existing frameworks into account and be rooted in strong international
coordination.
Cooperation with the European Systemic Risk Board
The ESRB continued to analyse In 2023 the ECB provided analytical, statistical, logistical and administrative support
potential sources of systemic risk
to the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) Secretariat. Notably, the ECB co-
and published a recommendation
on commercial real estate chaired the ESRB’s Instruments Working Group (IWG), Analysis Working Group
(AWG) and Task Force on Stress Testing, as well as the ECB/ESRB Project Team
on climate risk monitoring. It also co-chaired the agile teams established under the
AWG/Macroprudential Analysis Group (MPAG) and the IWG/Macroprudential Policy
Group (MPPG) on the impact of higher inflation and rising interest rates on financial
stability, and the AWG/MPAG agile team on systemic liquidity.
The ECB also supported the ESRB’s work on: (i) macroprudential tools for cyber
resilience;39 (ii) systemic implications and policy options with regard to crypto-assets
and decentralised finance;40 (iii) monitoring vulnerabilities related to NBFI;41 (iv)
policy options to address risks in corporate debt and real estate investment funds;42
v) vulnerabilities in the commercial real estate sector, on which the ESRB published
37 See (i) Lithuania: Opinion of the European Central Bank of 4 April 2023 on the imposition of a
temporary solidarity contribution (CON/2023/9); (ii) Italy: Opinion of the European Central Bank of 12
September 2023 on the imposition of an extraordinary tax on credit institutions (CON/2023/26); (iii)
Slovenia: Opinion of the European Central Bank of 2 November 2023 on the imposition of a temporary
tax on banks (CON/2023/35); (iv) Latvia: Opinion of the European Central Bank of 11 December 2023
on a temporary mortgage loan borrower protection fee payable by credit institutions (CON/2023/42);
and (v) Netherlands: Opinion of the European Central Bank of 15 December 2023 on the imposition of
a tax on credit institutions (CON/2023/45).
38 The following countries had introduced or announced a positive neutral rate for the countercyclical
buffer at the end of 2023: Ireland (1.5%), Cyprus (0.5%), Latvia (1%), Lithuania (1%), Netherlands (2%)
and Slovenia (1%).
39 See “Advancing macroprudential tools for cyber resilience”, ESRB, February 2023.
40 See “Crypto-assets and decentralised finance”, ESRB, May 2023.
41 See “NBFI Monitor”, ESRB, June 2023.
42 See “Issues note on policy options to address risks in corporate debt and real estate investment funds
from a financial stability perspective”, ESRB, September 2023.
ECB Annual Report 2023 47
a recommendation;43 and (vi) macroprudential frameworks for managing climate
risk.44 More detailed information can be found on the ESRB’s website and in its
Annual Reports.
3.3 Microprudential activities to ensure the safety and
soundness of individual banks
Banks remained resilient owing to Notwithstanding the challenging macroeconomic environment, European banks
the progress made in past years
remained resilient throughout 2023, including in the aftermath of the March turmoil,
and continuous supervisory
engagement which was triggered by the failure of some regional banks in the United States and
culminated in Europe with the UBS takeover of Credit Suisse overseen by the Swiss
authorities. In a dedicated data collection exercise conducted by the ECB and the
EBA, banks reported €73 billion of net unrealised losses on debt securities at book
value. This was considered a contained amount compared with the figure reported in
the United States. Improved asset quality and profitability helped banks withstand
the severe economic downturn in the adverse scenario of the ECB’s 2023 stress
test. This overall resilience is attributable to banks’ efforts over the years, to their
diversified funding and good liquidity environment, and to the ECB’s continuous
supervisory engagement, e.g. the work conducted on interest rate risk in the banking
book since 2021. In the 2023 Supervisory Review and Evaluation process (SREP),
the overall SREP score remained broadly unchanged. The Pillar 2 requirements for
CET1 capital were set at 1.2% on average, compared with 1.1% in 2022.
In spite of the SREP results and although European banks showed record
profitability in 2023, the ECB sees no room for complacency. The gradually
increasing pass-through of its policy rates to bank deposit rates and the broader
increase in bank funding costs, as well as a deterioration in asset quality in the real
estate sector and other interest rate sensitive sectors, could put the sustainability of
high profits at risk. The ECB’s supervisory work remains focused on persistent
weaknesses in risk management, governance and internal controls, and on
emerging risks.
Supervision became more risk- Over the course of 2023, ECB Banking Supervision became more risk-based and
based and effective
effective. On the basis of its internal work and the expert group recommendations,
the ECB implemented a new risk tolerance framework empowering supervisors to
adapt and prioritise their activities according to the individual situation of the bank
under their supervision, rather than applying a one-size-fits-all approach. In the same
vein, it introduced a new multi-year assessment framework for the SREP, enabling
supervisors to better calibrate the intensity and frequency of their analyses. It also
started to develop more timely and forceful escalation processes, building on the full
43 See “ESRB issues a recommendation on vulnerabilities in the commercial real estate sector in the
European Economic Area”, press release, ESRB, 25 January 2023.
44 See “Towards macroprudential frameworks for managing climate risk”, ECB and ESRB, December
2023.
ECB Annual Report 2023 48
range of supervisory tools, including periodic penalty payments, for instance in the
field of climate-related and environmental risks.45
Three banks were sanctioned by the ECB in 2023.46
In December 2023 the ECB published the supervisory priorities for 2024-2026, which
focus on (i) strengthening resilience to immediate macro-financial and geopolitical
shocks, (ii) accelerating the effective remediation of shortcomings in governance and
the management of climate-related and environmental risks, and (iii) furthering
progress in digital transformation and building robust operational resilience
frameworks.
As part of its continued efforts to enhance transparency, in 2023 the ECB published
(i) its four-step approach to determine the Pillar 2 requirement on a risk-by-risk basis,
(ii) the credit risk SREP methodology and market risk SREP methodology for
application in the 2024 cycle, and (iii) the Guide to qualifying holding procedures;
and in January 2024 it released an updated version of the Supervisory Manual,
which was last published in 2018.
In April 2023 the ECB, together with the Single Resolution Board, welcomed a set of
legislative changes to the European crisis management and deposit insurance
framework that had been proposed by the European Commission.
In October 2023 Claudia Buch was appointed as the new Chair of the Supervisory
Board of the ECB, in accordance with the established institutional selection process.
More detailed information can be found on the ECB’s banking supervision website
and in the 2023 ECB Annual Report on supervisory activities.
3.4 The ECB’s contribution to EU and international policy
initiatives
Several milestones were achieved Further progress was made in 2023 on improving the regulatory framework for the
in improving the regulatory
financial sector. The main achievements were (i) the agreement on the EU’s
framework
implementation of the final Basel III reforms, (ii) the initiatives to tackle climate-
related risks, and (iii) the proposal to strengthen the EU’s crisis management and
deposit insurance framework. Important headway was also made on regulating
crypto-assets and on enhancing market infrastructure regulation, for example with
regard to central clearing.
45 See “Powers, ability and willingness to act – the mainstay of effective banking supervision”, speech by
Frank Elderson, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of
the ECB, at House of the Euro, Brussels, 7 December 2023.
46 Using its power to impose sanctions on supervised credit institutions, the ECB sanctioned Landesbank
Hessen-Thüringen Girozentrale and Goldman Sachs Bank Europe for misreporting capital needs, in
February 2023 and May 2023 respectively. In August 2023 it sanctioned de Volksbank for
miscalculating capital needs.
ECB Annual Report 2023 49
Improving the regulatory framework for banks
Banking regulation work focused on In 2023 the ECB continued to support the negotiations on the EU banking package,
Basel III implementation, the EU’s
which comprises a set of amendments to the Capital Requirements Regulation
sustainable finance agenda and
crisis management (CRR)47 and the Capital Requirements Directive (CRD)48 aimed at implementing the
final Basel III reforms in the EU. In December the preparatory bodies of the
European Parliament and the EU Council endorsed the EU banking package.
Adoption of the final CRR and CRD texts is expected by the end of April 2024 once
the legal revision has been concluded. The reforms are intended to further bolster
the resilience of the EU banking system, especially by increasing the capital needed
to cover credit, operational and market risk exposures. They will also enhance the
supervisory toolkit, including for addressing climate-related and other sustainability
risks.49 Furthermore, the ECB contributed to the EU sustainable finance agenda,
notably by publishing opinions on a directive on corporate sustainability due
diligence and a regulation on environmental, social and governance (ESG) rating
activities.50
The discussions on completing the banking union focused on improving the EU’s
crisis management and deposit insurance framework. On 18 April 2023 the
European Commission published a legislative proposal aimed at strengthening bank
crisis management in the EU and, in particular, at enhancing authorities’ options for
handling the failure of smaller and medium-sized banks. The ECB strongly
welcomed the legislative package in an opinion51, stressing the need for better tools
and funding options for crisis management. Beyond the proposed legislative
package, the ECB called for further steps to complete the banking union. In
particular, this requires establishing a European deposit insurance scheme and
setting up a European framework for liquidity in resolution.
Finalising a regulatory framework for crypto-assets and anti-money
laundering
Important progress was made on The ECB continued to support the finalisation and implementation of a regulatory
regulating crypto-assets and
framework for crypto-assets in 2023, at both the European and the international
improving the anti-money
laundering framework level. Following the entry into force in the EU of the Markets in Crypto-assets
47 Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on
prudential requirements for credit institutions and amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 (OJ L 176,
27.6.2013, p. 1).
48 Directive 2013/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on access to the
activity of credit institutions and the prudential supervision of credit institutions, amending Directive
2002/87/EC and repealing Directives 2006/48/EC and 2006/49/EC (OJ L 176, 27.6.2013, p. 338).
49 For a more detailed assessment of the EU banking package and the ECB’s stance, see “Strong rules,
strong banks – the banking package”, Annual Report 2022, ECB, May 2023.
50 See Opinion of the European Central Bank of 6 June 2023 on a proposal for a directive on corporate
sustainability due diligence (CON/2023/15) (OJ C, 249, 14.7.2023, p. 3) and Opinion of the European
Central Bank of 4 October 2023 on the transparency and integrity of Environmental, Social and
Governance (ESG) rating activities (CON/2023/30) (OJ C, C/2023/1354, 01.12.2023).
51 See Opinion of the European Central Bank of 5 July 2023 on amendments to the Union crisis
management and deposit insurance framework (CON/2023/19) (OJ C 307, 31.8.2023, p.19).
ECB Annual Report 2023 50
Regulation52 in June, the ECB provided input on a number of technical standards
that were coordinated by the European Banking Authority and European Securities
and Markets Authority and aimed at implementing the Regulation. At the
international level, it contributed to the progress made in international fora such as
the Financial Stability Board (FSB), the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
(BCBS) and the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI).
Specifically, the FSB finalised its Global Regulatory Framework for Crypto-asset
Activities, providing high-level recommendations for regulating crypto-asset activities
and markets, and for global stablecoin arrangements. These recommendations were
incorporated into the broader G20 roadmap on crypto-assets, which was adopted in
October and had also benefited from ECB input. In addition, the ECB supported the
work of the BCBS on tightening and clarifying aspects of its standard on banks’
exposures to crypto-assets. In particular, the adjustments tighten the criteria for
stablecoins to receive a preferential regulatory treatment.
The ECB also continued to contribute actively to the finalisation of the European
Commission’s proposed legislative package on anti-money laundering and
countering the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT), including the creation of an EU-
level anti-money laundering authority. As outlined in its opinions,53 the ECB
supported close cooperation and information sharing between AML/CFT supervisors
and European banking supervision, and more generally, an effective EU regime to
counter the misuse of the EU financial system for money laundering and terrorism
financing.
Supporting the progress towards the capital markets union and
strengthening the NBFI regulatory framework
Continued efforts to advance the Legislative work continued in 2023 on initiatives to deepen the integration of the EU’s
capital markets union and
capital markets as part of the European Commission’s 2020 capital markets union
regulation of the NBFI sector
action plan. During the year the ECB contributed to the public policy debate on the
future of the capital markets union in various publications and speeches.54 In
addition, the ECB President, together with the Presidents of the Eurogroup, the
European Investment Bank, the European Council and the European Commission
published an op-ed on the importance of the capital markets union for channelling
Europe’s savings into growth. The ECB also actively participated in Eurogroup
52 Regulation (EU) 2023/1114 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 May 2023 on markets
in crypto-assets, and amending Regulations (EU) No 1093/2010 and (EU) No 1095/2010 and
Directives 2013/36/EU and (EU) 2019/1937 (OJ L 150, 9.6.2023, p.40).
53 See (i) Opinion of the European Central Bank of 16 February 2022 on a proposal for a regulation
establishing the Authority for Anti-Money Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism
(CON/2022/4) (OJ C 210, 25.5.2022, p. 5); (ii) Opinion of the European Central Bank of 16 February
2022 on a proposal for a directive and a regulation on the prevention of the use of the financial system
for the purposes of money laundering or terrorist financing (CON/2022/5) (OJ C 210, 25.5.2022, p.15);
and (iii) Opinion of the European Central Bank of 30 November 2021 on a proposal for a regulation to
extend traceability requirements to transfers of crypto-assets (CON/2021/37) (OJ C 68, 9.2.2022, p.2).
54 See Panetta, F., “Europe needs to think bigger to build its capital markets union”, The ECB Blog, ECB,
30 August 2023; “A Kantian shift for the capital markets union”, speech by Christine Lagarde, President
of the ECB, at the European Banking Congress, Frankfurt am Main, 17 November 2023; and “Banking
Union and Capital Markets Union: high time to move on”, speech by Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of
the ECB, at the Annual Joint Conference of the European Commission and the European Central Bank
on European Financial Integration, Brussels, 7 June 2023.
ECB Annual Report 2023 51
discussions on the future of European capital and financial markets, and contributed
to the legislative process related to the review of the European Market Infrastructure
Regulation.55
Furthermore, the ECB continued to highlight the importance of addressing structural
vulnerabilities in NBFI and improving the relevant policy framework from a
macroprudential perspective. Reviewing recent stress episodes in the NBFI sector,
policy implications for the liquidity preparedness and leverage in this sector were
discussed in its Financial Stability Review and Macroprudential Bulletin.56 The ECB
was also involved in the FSB’s assessment of the financial stability implications of
leverage in NBFI and actively contributed to the ongoing policy work to enhance the
resilience of NBFI.57 With regard to open-ended funds, the ECB contributed to the
revision of the FSB’s policy recommendations to address structural liquidity
mismatch in such funds.58
55 See Chapter 4 for further details on the European Market Infrastructure Regulation.
56 See “Non-banks’ liquidity preparedness and leverage: insights and policy implications from recent
stress events”, Financial Stability Review, ECB, May 2023; and “The growing role of investment funds
in euro area real estate markets: risks and policy considerations”, Macroprudential Bulletin, ECB,
3 April 2023.
57 See “The Financial Stability Implications of Leverage in Non-Bank Financial Intermediation”, FSB,
6 September 2023; and “Enhancing the Resilience of Non-Bank Financial Intermediation, Progress
Report, FSB, 6 September 2023.
58 See “Revised Policy Recommendations to Address Structural Vulnerabilities from Liquidity Mismatch in
Open-Ended Funds”, FSB, 20 December 2023, and “The growing role of investment funds in euro area
real estate markets: risks and policy considerations”, Macroprudential Bulletin, No 20, ECB, April 2023.
ECB Annual Report 2023 52
4 Smooth functioning of market
infrastructure and payments
The Eurosystem plays a central role in developing, operating and overseeing market
infrastructures and payments. In 2023 the Eurosystem successfully renewed its
wholesale payment system and continued developing TARGET Services. With a
view to further enhancing integration and innovation in European payments and
securities markets, the Eurosystem updated its retail payments strategy and started
analysing the potential impact of emerging technologies on the settlement of
wholesale financial transactions. In its work on exploring a potential digital euro, the
Eurosystem moved from the investigation to the preparation phase.
4.1 TARGET Services
The Eurosystem successfully On 20 March 2023 the Eurosystem successfully launched its new T2 wholesale
launched its new T2 wholesale
payment system, replacing the TARGET2 system in operation since November
payment system
2007. The T2 system introduces a real-time gross settlement (RTGS) system, a
central liquidity management function that optimises liquidity management across all
TARGET Services, offering a set of common components that are shared across
TARGET Services and extended operating hours. The migration took place between
17 and 20 March 2023, with all banks starting settlement in the new system in a “big
bang” approach on Monday, 20 March 2023. The new system complies with the
international standard for financial institution message exchange (ISO 20022) and
brings significant efficiency gains. Moreover, the new T2 set-up enables market
participants to streamline central bank money liquidity management for their euro
transactions in wholesale and retail payments, as well as for securities settlement.
Approximately 1,000 banks use T2 to initiate transactions in euro, either on their own
behalf or on behalf of their customers. Taking into account branches and
subsidiaries, more than 40,000 banks worldwide can be reached via T2. In 2023 on
average 409,444 payments per day with an average daily value of €2.2 trillion were
processed using T2 and its predecessor TARGET2. This was a 2.9% increase in the
daily volume of payments compared with payments made using TARGET2 in 2022.
From 1 January 2023, following Croatia’s accession to the euro area, the Croatian
financial community migrated from its national RTGS system to TARGET2/T2.
Onboarding of the Croatian market to TARGET Services continued in June with the
migration to the TARGET Instant Payment Settlement (TIPS) service and in
September, when the Croatian central securities depository (CSD) joined TARGET2-
Securities (T2S).
The Croatian CSD was onboarded as part of a wave in which five CSDs successfully
joined the T2S platform, including Euroclear Bank, one of the largest CSDs in the
world, the Bulgarian National Bank Government Securities Settlement System and
ECB Annual Report 2023 53
Central Depository AD, the other CSD operating in Bulgaria, Središnje klirinško
depozitarno društvo d.d. (SKDD) in Croatia and Euroclear Finland. The T2S platform
now connects 24 CSDs from 23 European markets, allowing securities settlement in
euro and Danish krone. This migration wave was an important development for T2S
and the Eurosystem from the operational, business and strategic perspectives. In
particular, the successful inclusion of a CSD (Euroclear Finland) that maintains end-
investor accounts reconfirms that Eurosystem market infrastructures can support all
EU markets and jurisdictions. Additionally, from a business perspective, the
migration of Euroclear Bank brings Eurobond instruments directly into T2S and, as of
2024, into the Eurosystem Collateral Management System (ECMS). In 2023, T2S
processed on average 699,868 transactions per day with an average daily value of
€790.3 billion.
TIPS continued to play an important role in the development of instant payments in
euro, with more banks and national communities joining in 2023. The growth in the
number of participants in TIPS led to a rise in transaction volumes of more than
127% compared with 2022, with a peak of 28 million instant payments settled in
December 2023 (compared with 18.7 million in December 2022). Testing for the
connection of Sveriges Riksbank and the Swedish krona to TIPS for instant
payments in 2024 was successfully completed. The collaboration between the
Eurosystem and Danmarks Nationalbank to connect the Danish krone to TIPS (and
T2) in 2025 continued smoothly.
In July 2023 the Eurosystem published a new pricing structure for TIPS that entered
into force on 1 January 2024. It ensures that the service operates on a cost recovery
basis, without making a profit. At the same time, the pricing of TIPS aims to support
the take-up of instant payments in Europe, which is also expected to accelerate,
given the legislative proposal put forward by the European Commission to make
instant payments in euro available to all citizens and businesses holding a bank
account in the EU and in European Economic Area countries.
In addition to the three settlement services (T2, T2S and TIPS), the Eurosystem is
developing a new TARGET Service, the ECMS, which will be a unified system for
managing the assets used as collateral in Eurosystem credit operations for all euro
area jurisdictions. The launch of the ECMS has been moved from April 2024 to
November 2024 to give users more time to complete testing of the ECMS
functionalities in a stable environment.
4.2 Digital euro project
The ECB launched the preparation The two-year investigation phase of the digital euro project concluded in October
phase of the digital euro project
2023. The stocktake of the work conducted during the investigation phase formed
the basis for the ECB Governing Council’s decision to launch the preparation phase.
The start of this new phase does not imply a decision on whether to issue a digital
euro. That decision can only be considered by the Governing Council after the
adoption of the legislative framework for the digital euro at the EU level.
ECB Annual Report 2023 54
During the investigation phase, the Eurosystem agreed on the high-level design and
technical requirements for a digital euro. The work was supported by a prototyping
exercise to validate the proposed design from a technical perspective and through
focus group research59 to gain input on the preferences and expectations of
potential users. Close and transparent engagement with market participants, other
EU institutions and policymakers ensured that all stakeholders could provide their
feedback on design and distribution options. Market research on technical aspects
showed that there is a sufficiently large pool of European providers able to develop
digital euro solutions and that a variety of architectural and technological design
options are available.
The first stage of the preparation phase, which started on 1 November 2023, will last
two years and will lay the foundations for the potential issuance of a digital euro.
During this timeframe, the focus will be on finalising the digital euro rulebook and
selecting providers that could potentially develop a digital euro platform and
infrastructure. The Eurosystem will also conduct further testing and experimentation,
and will continue to consult with all stakeholders – including the public – to ensure
that a digital euro meets the highest standards of quality, security, privacy and
usability.
Possible subsequent steps will be decided by the Governing Council based on the
results of the first stage of the preparation phase and developments in the legislative
process.
4.3 Innovation and integration of market infrastructure and
payments
The Eurosystem updated its retail In November 2023 the Eurosystem published an update of its retail payments
payments strategy
strategy in the light of the significant changes in the payment landscape in the four
years since its launch. In particular, Big Tech has increased activities in the payment
area, potentially negatively affecting Europe’s strategic autonomy in payments. In
addition, Russia’s war against Ukraine underscored the relevance of (cyber) risks to
critical infrastructures in Europe, including for payment services. Moreover,
considerable progress was made on the digital euro project.
The updated strategy retains its main goals, namely to develop pan-European
solutions for payments at the point of interaction (i.e. at the physical point of sale and
in the mobile and e-commerce space) and to further strengthen the Single Euro
Payments Area (SEPA), primarily through full deployment of instant payments. It
also includes a new goal to increase the resilience of retail payments, including by
having alternative payment solutions available as a contingency. Finally, the
complementarity between the Eurosystem’s retail payments strategy and the digital
euro project is also underlined, in particular the various ways in which a digital euro
could contribute to meeting the goals of the strategy. For example, a digital euro
59 For more information, see the focus group findings in the “Study on New Digital Payment Methods”,
March 2022 and the “Study on Digital Wallet Features”, March 2023 undertaken as part of the digital
euro project.
ECB Annual Report 2023 55
would offer a pan-European payment solution in itself, while also helping private
retail payment solutions achieve a pan-European reach.
Progress was made on financial In line with its goal to further European financial market integration in the post-trading
integration in the area of post-
area and to contribute to achieving capital markets union, the Eurosystem’s Advisory
trading
Group on Market Infrastructures for Securities and Collateral (AMI-SeCo) continued
to report on the progress made by AMI-SeCo markets (the European Economic Area
and UK and Swiss markets) on compliance with the standards under the T2S
Harmonisation Agenda, the Single Collateral management Rulebook for Europe
(SCoRE) (which is also necessary for interacting with ECMS), and corporate events
standards (including standards on shareholder identification). The overall compliance
rate with the T2S harmonisation standards remained at around 90%. The five new
CSDs that joined T2S in September 2023 were assessed as having a high level of
compliance with the T2S harmonisation standards. The 2023 Corporate Events
Compliance Report provided evidence that progress has also been made on
compliance with the corporate events standards. In the SCoREBoard report for the
second half of 2023, AMI-SeCo noted some delays in progress by stakeholders on
complying with the applicable SCoRE standards. In view of the rescheduling of the
go-live of the Eurosystem’s ECMS to November 2024, the AMI-SeCo agreed to defer
the deadline for compliance with the relevant SCoRE standards.
With a view to identifying remaining barriers to securities post-trade market
integration in the EU, AMI-SeCo launched a survey among its members and the
members of the National Stakeholder Groups in November 2023. AMI-SeCo also
provided input to the European Commission and the European Council on the post-
trade aspects of the proposal by the Commission for more efficient cross-border
withholding tax procedures and communicated its views on the potential shortening
of the standard T+2 securities settlement cycle to the European Securities and
Markets Authority (ESMA).
Lastly, the Eurosystem has started analysing the potential impact of emerging
technologies, including distributed ledger technology (DLT), on the settlement of
wholesale financial transactions (see Box 4).
4.4 Oversight and the role of central bank of issue
Comprehensive assessment of The safe and efficient functioning of financial market infrastructures (FMIs) and
TARGET Services was launched
payments in the euro area is an ongoing priority for the Eurosystem in its oversight
capacity. In addition, as central bank of issue for the euro, the Eurosystem is
involved in cooperative arrangements for FMIs outside the euro area with meaningful
euro-denominated activities.
As regards oversight of the Eurosystem’s TARGET Services (see Section 4.1), key
priorities included monitoring the T2-T2S consolidation project ahead of its go-live in
March 2023 and the onboarding of new markets. Furthermore, comprehensive
assessments of T2/TIPS against the Regulation on oversight requirements for
ECB Annual Report 2023 56
systemically important payment systems (SIPS) and of T2S against the CPMI-
IOSCO Principles were launched in October 2023.
The Eurosystem also oversees other SIPS, including EURO1, STEP2-T and the
MasterCard Clearing Management System (MCMS). In 2023 it focused on
finalisation of the first comprehensive assessment of the MCMS against the SIPS
Regulation, the launch of new comprehensive assessments of EURO1 and STEP2-T
against the SIPS Regulation, assessment of the MCMS against the cyber resilience
oversight expectations for financial market infrastructures (CROE) and monitoring of
the EURO1 migration to the ISO 20022 standard.
With respect to payment instruments, payment schemes and payment
arrangements, in 2023 the Eurosystem reached a major milestone in identifying the
payment arrangements to be overseen or monitored under the Eurosystem’s
framework for the oversight of electronic payment instruments, schemes and
arrangements (PISA framework). In addition to onboarding newly overseen entities
under the PISA framework, the Eurosystem conducted a comprehensive
assessment of the first group of pan-European schemes and continued its work on
card fraud monitoring.
As central bank of issue for the euro, the Eurosystem continued to be involved in
cooperative oversight and crisis management arrangements for FMIs with material
euro-denominated activities. As regards central counterparties (CCPs), the
Eurosystem contributed to assessing risk management changes, proposals for the
extension of services, recovery plans and resolution plans. With regard to securities
settlement, the Eurosystem continued to give input on the regular evaluation of
CSDs under the Central Securities Depository Regulation and to prepare for the
future authorisation of entities operating DLT-based market infrastructures under
Regulation (EU) No 2022/858 (DLT Pilot Regime Regulation).
In the area of cyber resilience, the review of the Eurosystem cyber resilience
strategy for FMIs was finalised, with details on enhancements and revisions to be
announced in early 2024. In addition, the ESCB conducted its periodic cyber
resilience survey across 80 FMIs in the EU and initiated follow-up with the respective
overseers and overseen entities.
The ECB supported various oversight-related global workstreams (for example, on
CCP margining practices, FMI safeguards for financial risks unrelated to participant
default and stablecoin arrangements), as well as the EU-wide CCP supervisory
stress test coordinated by ESMA. The ECB also published an overview of EU CCPs’
initial margin models, continuously monitored the impact of increased market
volatility on CCPs and their members and organised, together with the Deutsche
Bundesbank and the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the 2023 Joint Conference
on CCP risk management to facilitate discussion between the industry, regulatory
bodies and academia.
The Eurosystem regularly contributes to developing new EU regulations for FMIs
and payments. In particular, in 2023 it provided input to the ECB Opinion on the
review of the European Market Infrastructure Regulation. The ECB also actively
ECB Annual Report 2023 57
contributed to preparing secondary legislation for the Digital Operational Resilience
Act, notably in the area of threat-led penetration testing being developed in
accordance with the European framework for threat intelligence-based ethical red-
teaming (TIBER-EU).
Box 4
New technologies for wholesale central bank money settlement
The Eurosystem is analysing the potential impact of emerging technologies, including distributed
ledger technology (DLT), on the settlement of wholesale financial transactions. This work is part of
the Eurosystem’s efforts to ensure that central banks keep pace with and contribute to digital
innovation in payments and securities settlement.
The financial industry is increasingly interested in potential applications of DLT, including for
transactions that are currently settled in central bank money. If there is significant adoption of DLT
by the industry, central banks may need to take action to safeguard the smooth functioning of
payment systems and the role of central bank money as monetary anchor supporting the stability,
integration and efficiency of the European financial system.
The Eurosystem has identified four conceptual solutions that could enable central bank money
settlement of wholesale transactions where, for example, the securities leg of the transaction is
settled using DLT-based infrastructure (Figure A).
Figure A
Conceptual solutions for central bank money settlement of wholesale transactions registered on
DLT platforms
Source: See Neuhaus, H. and Plooij, M., “Central bank money settlement of wholesale transactions in the face of technological innovation”, Economic
Bulletin, Issue 8, ECB, 2023.
Notes: Blue lines, dots and icons represent central bank money (CeBM). Purple lines, dots and icons represent securities.
The Eurosystem plans to conduct exploratory work on DLT in the form of trials with real central bank
money settlement and experiments with mock settlement in a test environment. These will be
performed using three Eurosystem solutions enabling central bank money settlement of wholesale
financial transactions recorded on DLT platforms: the Trigger Solution provided by the Deutsche
Bundesbank, the TIPS Hash-Link solution provided by the Banca d’Italia (both examples of
conceptual solution 1), and the Full-DLT Interoperability solution provided by the Banque de France
ECB Annual Report 2023 58
(conceptual solution 2). Market players have been invited to express their interest in participating in
trials and experiments planned to take place between May and November 2024. In parallel, the
other two conceptual solutions will be further analysed internally within the Eurosystem.
A dedicated market contact group on DLT has been set up to support the Eurosystem’s exploratory
work. This group provides expert input and keeps the Eurosystem abreast of advances in the use of
DLT and other new technologies in wholesale financial markets.
ECB Annual Report 2023 59
5 Market operations activities and
financial services provided to other
institutions
The Eurosystem approved a new framework for the provision of euro liquidity lines to
non-euro area central banks in August 2023 and kept in place several liquidity lines
with non-euro area central banks, thereby providing a backstop to market-based
funding. The ECB continued to offer US dollar operations to euro area counterparties
on a regular basis. No ECB interventions took place in the foreign exchange market.
The ECB remained responsible for the administration of various financial operations
on behalf of the European Union and played a coordinating role in relation to the
Eurosystem reserve management services framework.
5.1 Developments in market operations
Euro and foreign currency liquidity lines
The Eurosystem’s swap and repo lines are monetary policy instruments. They help
prevent tensions in international funding markets from hampering the effectiveness
of euro area monetary policy transmission. Table 5.1 shows the liquidity lines in
operation as of 31 December 2023.
In 2023 the ECB continued to provide US dollar liquidity on a weekly basis with a
seven-day tenor in coordination with the Federal Reserve System, the Bank of
Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan and the Swiss National Bank (the
swap line network). From 20 March to 30 April 2023 the frequency of the seven-day
dollar providing operations was increased to daily in a coordinated manner with the
central banks of the swap line network. The higher frequency was intended to
enhance effectiveness and strengthened the backstop role of the operation in a
period of elevated pressure in US dollar funding conditions. Borrowing by euro area
counterparties remained limited throughout the year.
ECB Annual Report 2023 60
Table 5.1
Overview of operational liquidity lines
Maximum borrowable
Non-euro area counterpart Type of arrangement Reciprocal amount (EUR millions)
Danmarks Nationalbank Swap line No 24,000
Sveriges Riksbank Swap line No 10,000
Bank of Canada Swap line Yes Unlimited
People’s Bank of China Swap line Yes 45,000
Bank of Japan Swap line Yes Unlimited
Swiss National Bank Swap line Yes Unlimited
Bank of England Swap line Yes Unlimited
Federal Reserve System Swap line Yes Unlimited
Narodowy Bank Polski Swap line No 10,000
Magyar Nemzeti Bank Repo line No 4,000
Banca Naţională a României Repo line No 4,500
Bank of Albania Repo line No 400
Andorran Financial Authority Repo line No 35
National Bank of the Republic of North Repo line No 400
Macedonia
Central Bank of the Republic of San Marino Repo line No 100
Source: ECB.
Notes: List of central bank liquidity lines that the Eurosystem maintains (as of 31 December 2023). The table does not include repo
lines established with non-euro area central banks under the Eurosystem repo facility for central banks (EUREP), for which the ECB
did not disclose its counterparties. Under its new framework, the ECB has disclosed all liquidity lines since 16 January 2024.
On 3 August 2023 the Governing Council approved a new framework for the
provision of euro liquidity lines to non-euro area central banks, following an in-depth
review of the previous framework in place and based on experience in recent years.
The new framework came into effect on 16 January 2024 and upholds the role of
liquidity lines as monetary policy instruments, retains the fundamental elements of
the framework in place so far but streamlines it, and integrates existing repo facilities
into a unified permanent framework called EUREP. Swap lines are available to
countries of highest creditworthiness or systemic importance from a euro area
perspective. Access to a euro liquidity line might differ in normal times from periods
of acute, broad-based financial market distress, when the establishment of
precautionary lines with a broader set of countries could be warranted. The
Governing Council will continue to assess requests for liquidity lines on a case-by-
case basis.
Reporting on foreign exchange interventions
The ECB did not intervene in the foreign exchange market in 2023. Since the
inception of the euro, the ECB has intervened in the foreign exchange market twice –
in 2000 and 2011. Data on foreign exchange interventions are published on a
quarterly basis with a delay of one quarter on the ECB’s website and in the Statistical
Data Warehouse. The information published in the quarterly table is also recapped in
Table 5.2. If there were no foreign exchange interventions in the relevant quarter,
this is explicitly stated.
ECB Annual Report 2023 61
Table 5.2
ECB foreign exchange interventions
Intervention Currency Gross amount Net amount
Period Date type Currency pair bought (EUR millions) (EUR millions)
Q3 2000 22/09/2000 Coordinated EUR/USD EUR 1,640 1,640
22/09/2000 Coordinated EUR/JPY EUR 1,500 1,500
Q4 2000 03/11/2000 Unilateral EUR/USD EUR 2,890 2,890
03/11/2000 Unilateral EUR/JPY EUR 680 680
06/11/2000 Unilateral EUR/USD EUR 1,000 1,000
09/11/2000 Unilateral EUR/USD EUR 1,700 1,700
09/11/2000 Unilateral EUR/JPY EUR 800 800
Q1 2011 18/03/2011 Coordinated EUR/JPY EUR 700 700
Q1 to Q4 2021 - - - - - -
Q1 to Q4 2022 - - - - - -
Q1 to Q4 2023 - - - - - -
Source: ECB.
The reporting framework covers foreign exchange interventions carried out by the
ECB unilaterally and in coordination with other international authorities, as well as
interventions “at the margins” within the exchange rate mechanism (ERM II).
5.2 Administration of EU borrowing and lending operations
The ECB processed payments for The ECB is responsible for the administration of accounts and processing of
various EU loan programmes
payments relating to the borrowing and lending operations of the EU under the
medium-term financial assistance (MTFA) facility60, the European financial
stabilisation mechanism (EFSM)61, the European instrument for temporary support to
mitigate unemployment risks in an emergency (SURE)62, the Next Generation EU
(NGEU) programme63 and the macro-financial assistance to Ukraine programme
(MFA+)64. The ECB is also responsible for the administration of certain payments
arising in connection with operations under the European Financial Stability Facility
60 In accordance with Article 141(2) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (OJ C 326,
26.10.2012), p. 47, Articles 17, 21.2, 43.1 and 46.1 of the Statute of the ESCB, and Article 9 of Council
Regulation (EC) No 332/2002 of 18 February 2002 establishing a facility providing medium-term
financial assistance for Member States’ balances of payments (OJ L 53, 23.2.2002, p. 1).
61 In accordance with Articles 122(2) and 132(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union,
Articles 17 and 21 of the Statute of the ESCB, and Article 8 of Council Regulation (EU) No 407/2010 of
11 May 2010 establishing a European financial stabilisation mechanism (OJ L 118, 12.5.2010, p. 1).
62 In accordance with Articles 17 and 21 of the Statute of the ESCB in conjunction with Article 10 of
Council Regulation (EU) No 2020/672 of 19 May 2020 on the establishment of a European instrument
for temporary support to mitigate unemployment risks in an emergency (SURE) following the COVID-
19 outbreak (OJ L 159, 20.5.2020, p. 1).
63 In accordance with Articles 17 and 21 of the Statute of the ESCB in conjunction with Regulation (EU)
No 2021/241 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 February 2021 establishing the
Recovery and Resilience Facility (OJ L 57, 18.2.2021, p. 17).
64 In accordance with Articles 17 and 21 of the Statute of the ESCB in conjunction with Regulation (EU)
2022/2463 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 December 2022 establishing an
instrument for providing support to Ukraine for 2023 (macro-financial assistance +) (OJ L 322,
16.12.2022, p. 1).
ECB Annual Report 2023 62
(EFSF)65 and the European Stability Mechanism (ESM)66 and for processing all
payments in relation to the loan facility agreement for Greece67. In 2023 the ECB
completed its preparations to perform paying agent services for the European
Commission, thereby extending the ECB’s current fiscal agent services.
As at 31 December 2023 the total outstanding nominal amount was €200 million
under the MTFA facility, €42.8 billion under the EFSM, €98.4 billion under SURE and
€39.54 billion under the loan facility agreement for Greece. Finally, in 2023 the ECB
processed disbursements and interest payments of NGEU loans and grants to and
from various Member States and MFA+ loans to Ukraine.
5.3 Eurosystem reserve management services
A number of Eurosystem national In 2023 a comprehensive set of financial services continued to be offered within the
central banks provided services
Eurosystem reserve management services (ERMS) framework established in 2005
under the ERMS framework
for the management of customers’ euro-denominated reserve assets. A number of
Eurosystem national central banks provide financial services within this framework ‒
under harmonised terms and conditions and in line with market standards ‒ to
central banks, monetary authorities and government agencies located outside the
euro area, as well as to international organisations. The ECB performs an overall
coordinating role, monitors the smooth functioning of the services, promotes
changes to improve the framework and prepares related reports for the ECB’s
decision-making bodies.
The number of customer accounts reported in the ERMS stood at 273 at the end of
2023, compared with 270 at the end of 2022. The total aggregated holdings
(including cash assets and securities holdings) managed within the ERMS
framework decreased by approximately 20% in 2023 compared with 2022.
65 In accordance with Articles 17 and 21 of the Statute of the ESCB in conjunction with Article 3.5 of the
EFSF Framework Agreement.
66 In accordance with Articles 17 and 21 of the Statute of the ESCB in conjunction with Article 5.12.1 of
the ESM General Terms for Financial Assistance Facility Agreements.
67 In the context of the loan facility agreement between the Member States whose currency is the euro
(other than Germany and Greece) and Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (acting in the public interest,
subject to the instructions of and with the benefit of the guarantee of the Federal Republic of Germany)
as lenders and the Hellenic Republic as borrower and the Bank of Greece as agent to the borrower,
and pursuant to Articles 17 and 21.2 of the Statute of the ESCB and Article 2 of Decision of the
European Central Bank of 10 May 2010 concerning the management of pooled bilateral loans for the
benefit of the Hellenic Republic and amending Decision ECB/2007/7 (ECB/2010/4) (OJ L 119,
13.5.2010, p. 24).
ECB Annual Report 2023 63
6 Cash remains the most frequently used
means of payment among European
citizens, with a low level of
counterfeiting
Euro banknote circulation has been affected by rises in the ECB’s key interest rates
as cash holdings as a store of value decreased. A clear majority of European
citizens find it important to have the option to pay in cash. Accordingly, the ECB aims
to ensure effective access to and acceptance of cash in the euro area.
The Eurosystem is also committed to ensuring that cash remains as sustainable and
environmentally friendly as possible and has assessed the environmental footprint of
banknotes as a mean of payment. The preparations for the development of a new
series of euro banknotes are an opportunity to make euro banknotes more relatable
to all Europeans. The public is therefore consulted throughout the design process.
6.1 Circulation of euro banknotes and ensuring access to
and acceptance of cash
Euro banknote circulation has been At the end of 2023 euro banknote circulation reached 29.8 billion pieces and a total
affected by interest rate increases
value of €1.57 trillion. The increases in the ECB’s key interest rates since July 2022
have continued to have a dampening effect on holding cash as a store of value,
since banknotes do not yield any interest. Accordingly, 2023 was marked by very low
annual growth rates of 1.2% and -0.3% in terms of the number and value of
banknotes respectively.
ECB Annual Report 2023 64
Chart 6.1
Number and value of euro banknotes in circulation
(left-hand scale: EUR billions; right-hand scale: billions)
Source: ECB.
To maintain the quality of euro banknotes in circulation as well as trust in them,
Eurosystem national central banks processed 25.3 billion euro banknotes and
replaced 3.3 billion worn-out banknotes with newly printed ones.
The value of euro coin circulation grew by 3.2% annually to reach €33.5 billion at the
end of 2023, equivalent to 148.2 billion euro coins.
In 2022 the ECB conducted a study on payment attitudes of consumers in the euro
area, which showed that 60% of citizens consider it important to have the option to
pay in cash. To ensure effective access to and acceptance of cash, on 28 June 2023
the European Commission adopted a proposal for a regulation on the legal tender of
euro banknotes and coins. In its Opinion on the Commission proposal, the ECB
voiced its strong support for establishing clear rules on the mandatory acceptance of
euro cash and on refusals of cash acceptance by retailers, for example “no cash”
signs at shop entrances. Good access to and acceptance of cash are the key
components of the Eurosystem 2030 cash strategy to ensure that euro cash
continues to be widely available as an attractive, reliable and competitive means of
payment and store of value.
6.2 Study on the environmental footprint of euro banknotes
The Product Environmental The ECB conducted a Product Environmental Footprint study of euro banknotes to
Footprint considers the full life cycle
assess the environmental footprint of a person’s yearly cash payments using euro
of banknotes from raw materials to
manufacturing, distribution and banknotes to ensure that cash remains as sustainable and environmentally friendly
disposal
as possible.
The findings showed that the footprint of a person’s yearly use of euro banknotes is
equivalent to driving eight kilometres by car and accounts for only 0.01% of their total
annual environmental impact related to consumption activities.
ECB Annual Report 2023 65
The Product Environmental Banknotes are reused several times once they are put into circulation. The
Footprint study also explored the
distribution stage, including energy consumption and transportation, is the main
progress made so far
contributor to their environmental footprint. The use of sustainable cotton in banknote
paper has reduced the environmental impact of euro banknotes by almost 50% and
the overall footprint of paying with euro banknotes by 3.6% compared to using
conventional cotton from non-sustainable sources. Further reductions are foreseen
once the move to more organic cotton takes place. Extensive research and
development are underway to identify alternative waste disposal methods for
banknotes, such as recycling and reusing waste material.
6.3 Development of euro banknote counterfeiting
2023 saw one of the lowest levels Some 467,000 counterfeit euro banknotes were withdrawn from circulation in 2023,
of counterfeits in proportion to total
one of the lowest levels ever in proportion to total banknotes in circulation (Chart
banknotes in circulation
6.2). In 2023, 16 counterfeits were detected per million genuine banknotes in
circulation. Despite this very small proportion, the number of counterfeit banknotes
increased compared with 2022, when the number of counterfeits was exceptionally
low following the COVID-19 pandemic. There is little likelihood of receiving a
counterfeit. Most counterfeits are of low quality with no or only very poor imitations of
security features. Notes can be checked using the simple “feel, look and tilt” method
described on the banknote security features web page and on the websites of the
euro area national central banks.
Chart 6.2
Number of counterfeits detected annually per 1 million genuine notes in circulation
Source: ECB.
6.4 Preparations for future euro banknotes
The ECB is preparing to develop a new series of euro banknotes with a view to
maintaining their high resilience to counterfeiting and making them as
environmentally friendly as possible. This process reflects the Eurosystem’s
ECB Annual Report 2023 66
commitment to cash and is an opportunity to make euro banknotes more relatable to
all Europeans.
To ensure that the views of A multidisciplinary advisory group – with members from all euro area countries –
Europeans are reflected in the
proposed a shortlist of themes based on input from the public. The Governing
future design, the public is
consulted throughout the redesign Council subsequently selected seven themes, and the public was invited to express
process
their preferences. Based on the outcome of two public surveys in summer 2023, the
Governing Council selected “European culture” and “Rivers and birds” as two
possible themes for future euro banknotes.
A decision on the final designs and In addition, the Governing Council decided to establish an advisory group to propose
when to produce and issue the new
motifs that could illustrate the selected themes by the end of 2024. After that, a
banknotes is expected in 2026
competition will be held to design the new banknotes. European citizens will again
have the chance to express their preferences on several design options. The ECB is
expected to decide in 2026 on the final designs and on when to produce and issue
the new banknotes. Once a decision to produce new banknotes has been taken, it
will still be several years before the first banknotes are issued.
ECB Annual Report 2023 67
7 Statistics
The ECB – assisted by the national central banks (NCBs) – develops, collects,
compiles and disseminates a wide range of statistics and data needed to support the
ECB’s monetary policy, as well as financial stability-related and other tasks of the
European System of Central Banks (ESCB) and the European Systemic Risk Board.
These statistics are also used by public authorities, international organisations,
financial market participants, the media and the general public, and help the ECB to
increase the transparency of its work.
In 2023 the ECB focused on new euro area statistics, namely detailed reporting on
external statistics and breakdowns on the loans, currency and deposits component
of government debt. The ECB also decided to expand the reporting population for
Money Market Statistical Reporting and published new statistics on financial
accounts with a breakdown of life insurance and pension entitlements by investment
risk. As part of its climate action plan, the ECB published climate-related indicators
on its website. In addition, the Eurosystem launched a survey to assess which topics
could be included in the scope of the Integrated Reporting Framework.
7.1 New and enhanced euro area statistics and other
developments
New details on external statistics In April 2023 the ECB started publishing additional details on external statistics in
were made available to users
line with the amended ECB Guideline on external statistics, addressing the needs of
users for more detailed cross-border statistics. The new series separate data for
investment funds, insurance corporations and pension funds, other financial
institutions, non-financial corporations, and combined households and non-profit
institutions serving households. They also identify the type of debt instrument
employed for direct investment. Additional details are available for debt securities,
loans and trade credits and advances, and additional geographic counterparts.
New breakdowns on the loans, Furthermore, the ECB started to release new breakdowns for the loans, currency
currency and deposits of general
and deposits component of EU Member States’ government debt, which allows for a
government debt were published
more thorough evaluation of government financing. While debt securities typically
make up the largest share of government debt, loans and deposits are significant
components, equivalent to about 16% of euro area GDP in 2022 and 17.5% of total
government debt. The data show the various sources of funding and provide a
breakdown by creditor category, including commercial banks, multilateral institutions
(such as the International Monetary Fund) and the European Union institutions (for
example the European Investment Bank).
The ECB decided to expand the In April 2023 the ECB decided to expand the reporting population for Money Market
reporting population for the euro
Statistical Reporting (MMSR), adding 24 new banks to the 46 banks already
money market statistics
reporting. The new MMSR banks will start reporting on 1 July 2024. The data they
provide will help make the MMSR data published by the ECB more representative.
ECB Annual Report 2023 68
Data from the new reporting agents will be included in the calculation of the euro
short-term rate (€STR) at a later stage to ensure that the newly reported data are of
a sufficiently high quality. The expanded reporting population will support the
representativeness, robustness and reliability of the benchmark.
The ECB published new statistics Following the amendment of its Guideline on the statistical reporting requirements for
on financial accounts with a
quarterly financial accounts, in October 2023 the ECB started publishing new
breakdown of life insurance and
pension entitlements by investment breakdowns for life insurance, annuity entitlements and pension entitlements by
risk
allocation of investment risk for all EU Member States and the euro area. These
entitlements are substantial components of household financial assets and are
recorded in the financial accounts as liabilities of insurance corporations and pension
funds (and to a much lesser extent of other sectors). The new data show to what
extent households bear the investment risk of the premiums and contributions
invested on their behalf.
7.2 Publication of new climate-related statistical indicators
In January 2023 the ECB published a first set of experimental and analytical climate
change-related statistical indicators on its website. These indicators were collated in
close cooperation with ESCB national central banks and are part of the ECB’s
broader climate action plan.
The experimental sustainable finance indicators give an overview of debt
instruments with sustainability characteristics that are issued or held by residents in
the euro area. They provide information on the proceeds raised to finance
sustainable projects and, by extension, the transition to a net-zero economy.
Analytical carbon emission indicators for financial institutions supply information on
the carbon-intensity of the securities and loan portfolios of financial institutions and
thus help to assess the sector’s role in financing the transition to a net-zero economy
and the associated risks. The indicators provide information on banks’ exposure to
counterparties with a high dependence on carbon emission-intensive business
models.
Analytical indicators on the physical risks in loan and security portfolios assess risks
stemming from the impact of climate change-induced natural hazards, such as floods
and wildfires, on the performance of loans, bonds and equities. The indicators can
be used to compare physical risk across countries, sectors and hazards.
Work continued on all three datasets to further enhance the quality of the data and
breakdowns available, including geographical, sectoral and other details.
7.3 Making banks’ data reporting more efficient
The Integrated reporting Framework (IReF) seeks to integrate existing ESCB
statistical data requirements for banks as far as possible into a single, standardised
reporting framework applicable across the euro area.
ECB Annual Report 2023 69
The IReF is a first step towards a broader initiative for an integrated reporting system
for statistical, prudential and resolution data in the European Union, as requested by
the European banking industry and solicited by the European Parliament and the
Council. The European Banking Authority, the ECB, the Single Resolution Board and
the European Commission work together in an informal coordination group to further
promote such integration. In 2023 they discussed the working modalities for a Joint
Bank Reporting Committee (JBRC), involving relevant European and national
authorities as well as the banking industry. The JBRC is expected to be set up in
2024.
The ESCB is also cooperating closely with the banking industry to optimise reporting
and reduce the overall reporting burden via the Banks’ Integrated Reporting
Dictionary (BIRD). This is a voluntary and collaborative initiative that brings together
the ESCB national central banks and commercial banks. BIRD – which can be
accessed free of charge – helps banks to generate statistical, supervisory and
resolution-related reporting output that complies with the reporting requirements set
out in European legislation. BIRD is an integrated dictionary with redundancy-free
content: the concepts underlying reporting obligations are all identified and described
once, helping banks to decide which data to extract from their internal systems and
how to process them.
One of BIRD’s first deliverables will be to help banks comply with the IReF – a new
data collection framework that will apply consistently across all euro area countries.
Reporting agents will be able to use BIRD for IReF reporting, as well as other
reporting obligations. BIRD will help to reduce banks’ reporting burden and improve
the quality of the data reported to the relevant authorities.
Box 5
First release of new Household Distributional Wealth Accounts
New experimental statistics provide quarterly information on households’ wealth distribution in the
euro area in line with national accounts.
The new Distributional Wealth Accounts (DWA) published by the ECB provide insight into the
distribution of wealth among households in the euro area and euro area countries, consistent with
the aggregated quarterly sector accounts (QSA). The new statistics support the economic,
monetary and financial stability analyses of the ECB. The DWA is linked to the ECB’s 2021
monetary policy strategy review, which aims to include a systematic assessment of the two-way
interaction between income and wealth distributions and monetary policy. The DWA will allow new
insights into the monetary policy transmission process. The release follows the recommendations of
the G20 Data Gaps Initiative to develop distributional information on household income,
consumption, savings and wealth in line with the national accounts.
The method and results have been developed and compiled by the European System of Central
Banks. The common approach may be further enhanced at national level, taking into account
additional data sources available locally. Some national central banks have already implemented
such improvements. The data combine the aggregated QSA with household-level information from
the Household Finance and Consumption Survey (HFCS) between 2010 and 2021 and other
ECB Annual Report 2023 70
sources. Results for the quarters after 2021 are estimated using data from the most recent sector
accounts and the latest available HFCS wave or the NSI data collected in some countries. The data
are compiled quarterly and published five months after the end of each period. Results are available
for the euro area, 19 individual euro area countries (all euro area countries except Croatia) and
Hungary.
The DWA provide data on net wealth and total assets and liabilities, and their components.
Households are broken down into the top five deciles of net wealth and the bottom 50% as well as
by employment and housing status. The DWA dataset also includes the Gini coefficient for net
wealth, data on median and mean net wealth, the share of net wealth held by the bottom 50%, top
10% and top 5% of households, as well as the debt-to-asset ratio by household net wealth decile.
Chart A
Changes in housing wealth by net wealth decile and share in net wealth by the top 5%, euro area
a)Housing wealth b)Share in net wealth of top 5%
(EUR trillions) (percentages)
Source: DWA.
Box 6
Payments statistics ‒ enhanced scope and higher frequency
The amended ECB Regulation on payments statistics came into effect on 1 January 2022. The
enhancements compared with the previous legal framework reflect both developments in the
payments landscape and relevant changes to EU legislation. The frequency of data collection has
also increased from annual to semi-annual and quarterly. The first release of payments statistics
data collected under the amended framework took place on 9 November 2023 via the ECB Data
Portal. Data were published for all quarters of 2022 and for the first two quarters of 2023, and for
the two halves of 2022.
The payment statistics made available on a semi-annual basis now include information on
innovative retail payment services, such as payments using mobile devices, contactless payments,
ECB Annual Report 2023 71
e-commerce and new types of payment services as defined in the revised Payment Services
Directive (PSD2). A press release is published with each half-yearly dissemination. As part of the
enhanced data collection, data in the ECB Data Portal show, among other things, the strong
demand for contactless card payments, which in the first half of 2023 accounted for 57% of all card
payments in the euro area (Chart A).
Chart A
Share of contactless card payments as a percentage of all card payments in the euro area in the
first half of 2023
Source: ECB.
Additionally, data are collected on fraudulent payment transactions, authentication methods for
payment transactions and on payment schemes. On a quarterly basis and for the purposes of
monitoring cross-border trade, data with a worldwide individual country breakdown are collected on
card-based payment transactions, with further breakdowns by merchant category code.
ECB Annual Report 2023 72
8 ECB research activities
In 2023 ECB research focused, among other things, on assessing inflation
developments, monetary transmission, climate change, and structural change. More
specifically, the Heads of Research of the European System of Central Banks
(ESCB) launched the Research Network on Challenges for Monetary Policy
Transmission in a Changing World (ChaMP) aimed at using rich granular datasets to
analyse the strength, speed and heterogeneity of monetary transmission channels in
the euro area amid unprecedented shocks, structural changes and shifting inflation
dynamics. The Household Finance and Consumption Network (HFCN) continued to
deliver new insights into the impact of inflation on heterogeneous households across
the euro area. The ECB’s Consumer Expectations Survey (CES) is now firmly
established as a source of valuable policy and research insights into the formation of
household expectations. Climate change continued to be an important topic for ECB
research activities. The ECB also collaborated closely with national central banks
within the ESCB research clusters, organising annual workshops to discuss the most
pressing issues in the different fields of specialisation.
8.1 Update on ESCB research initiatives
The ChaMP Network started work The ChaMP Network started work in May 2023. It is foreseen to last for two years,
in May 2023
with a possible extension of one additional year. The Network is structured in two
workstreams: transmission of monetary policy via the financial system (WS1) and
transmission of monetary policy via the real economy (WS2). The ChaMP Network
started with an initial work programme encompassing 180 research projects by over
250 authors from most central banks in the ESCB. The first workshops were held in
Brussels on 25 October 2023 (WS2) and in Lisbon on 31 October 2023 (WS1). The
WS1 workshop included presentations on the transmission of monetary policy via
banks to corporations and households and on the role of non-bank financial
intermediaries, while the WS2 workshop focused on the relevance of production
networks between firms (for example supply constraints and other shocks) and of
structural changes (for example digitalisation, (de)globalisation and climate change)
for the transmission of monetary policy. The first in-person meeting of the leadership
team took place in Lisbon on 30 October 2023.
The HFCN released the results of the fourth (2021) wave of the Household Finance
and Consumption Survey (HFCS) in July 2023. The HFCS is a useful source of
household-level information on household finances and consumption for several
research projects conducted by HFCN members, the ECB’s Research Taskforce on
Heterogeneity and external researchers. These projects include work on the
distributional effects of inflation shocks on household balance sheets,68 differences
in holdings of wealth between men and women (the gender wealth gap), measuring
68 See Pallotti, F., Paz-Pardo, G. Slacalek, J., Tristani, O. and Violante, G. L., “Who Bears the Costs of
Inflation? Euro Area Households and the 2021-2022 Shock”, Working Paper Series, No 2877, ECB,
2023.
ECB Annual Report 2023 73
income uncertainty using expectations data, the heterogeneity of the effects of the
pandemic on household finances, and the new Distributional Wealth Accounts (see
Box 5).
8.2 Update on ECB research initiatives
The ECB’s Consumer Expectations Survey (CES) was further developed in 2023,
offering fresh household-sector insights for policy analysis and research. The ECB
extended the survey’s coverage beyond the initial six countries (Belgium, Germany,
France, Italy, the Netherlands and Spain) in the pilot phase to include five additional
euro area countries (Austria, Finland, Greece, Ireland and Portugal). The CES
proved to be an invaluable policy and research tool for analysing household inflation
expectations. Research showed that restrictive monetary policy together with active
communication on the role of monetary policy in stabilising future inflation promoted
public trust and prevented recent price and cost shocks from becoming entrenched
in consumer inflation expectations.69 The CES was also used to highlight the
heterogenous impact of inflation on expectations across households. One important
finding is that low-income households were most affected by inflation owing to their
exposure to increases in the prices of necessities such as energy and food.
Climate-related research topics Climate-related research topics remained very prominent in 2023. Research
remained very prominent in 2023
provided evidence of a disconnect, whereby banks with more extensive
environmental disclosures extended more credit to polluting borrowers, without
charging higher interest rates or shortening debt maturities.70 Other work focused on
the unintended consequences of carbon taxes. Analysis of the risk of “greenflation”
(persistent deviations of inflation from our target stemming from carbon taxes or
carbon pricing schemes) suggests that when carbon taxes are increased very slowly,
decarbonisation can be achieved without endangering the ECB’s mandate.71 Other
work has shown that carbon pricing mechanisms reduce firms’ carbon emissions but
also tilt their investment mix away from green innovation to short-term pollution
abatement.72 The effects of climate change on our understanding of macroeconomic
and financial stability were also at the core of the policy panel discussion featured by
the “WE_ARE_IN” conference jointly organised with the Centre for Economic Policy
Research.
In 2023 ECB staff published 120 papers in the ECB’s Working Paper Series. In
addition, more policy-oriented or methodological studies were published in the ECB’s
Occasional Paper Series, Statistics Paper Series and Discussion Paper Series.
Many of the ECB’s research activities also resulted in publications in renowned
69 See Ehrmann, M., Georgarakos, D. and Kenny, G., “Credibility gains from communicating with the
public: evidence from the ECB’s new monetary policy strategy”, Working Paper Series, No 2785, ECB,
February 2023.
70 See Giannetti, M., Jasova, M., Loumioti, M. and Mendicino, C., “Glossy green banks: the disconnect
between environmental disclosures and lending activities”, Working Paper Series, No 2882, ECB,
2023.
71 See Nakov, A. and Thomas, C., “Climate-conscious monetary policy”, Working Paper Series, No 2845,
ECB, 2023.
72 See Bustamante, M. C. and Zucchi, F., “Carbon trade-offs: how firms respond to emission
controls”, Research Bulletin, No 109, ECB, 17 July 2023.
ECB Annual Report 2023 74
academic journals, while 12 articles were released in the ECB’s Research Bulletin
targeting a more general audience. Box 7 describes in more detail the results of
recent ECB work on the economic dynamics after extreme events – a topic of great
importance for both price and financial stability.
8.3 Update on the work of ESCB research clusters
Regular research networks continued coordinating research efforts within the ESCB
and maintaining relations with academic researchers. In particular, the ESCB
research clusters on “Monetary economics” (Cluster 1), “International
macroeconomics, fiscal policy, labour economics, competitiveness and EMU
governance” (Cluster 2), “Financial stability, macroprudential regulation and
microprudential supervision” (Cluster 3) and “Climate change” (Cluster 4) held
workshops on the most pressing issues in their fields. The annual workshop of
Cluster 1 in 2023 was postponed and will now be held at Narodowy Bank Polski in
Warsaw on 21-22 March 2024. Cluster 2 held its annual workshop at the Bank of
England on 16-17 November 2023. It featured five sessions focusing on productivity,
labour markets, international macroeconomics, energy shocks, and climate policy
and fiscal policy. Cluster 3 ran its annual workshop in Saariselkä, Finland on 23-25
November 2023, focusing on financial stability and financial intermediation. Cluster 4
held its second annual workshop in hybrid format at the ECB on 13-14 November
2023. The topics discussed ranged from the effect of temperature shocks on inflation
to the dynamics of biodiversity.
Box 7
Economic dynamics after extreme events – quantifying the financial stability trade-offs for
monetary policy during periods of high inflation
Recent research has focused on developing and applying new tools to assess and quantify the link
between monetary policy and macroeconomic tail risks. Financial stability conditions and balance
sheet capacity in the financial sector play a crucial role for macroeconomic tail risks, in line with an
increasing body of evidence identifying financial distress as a strong predictor for near-term
downside risks to growth. Furthermore, monetary interventions can affect financial stability in the
short term through their immediate impact on the financial sector, both by providing financial
intermediaries with liquidity during crises and risking sudden market disorder as rates are hiked and
financing conditions tightened.73
When inflationary pressures started intensifying in 2022, the world’s major central banks faced a
dilemma: rapidly tighten monetary policy at the risk of fuelling financial stress after years of ultra-low
interest rates or take a more gradual approach that would protect the financial system and
economic activity, but risk above-target inflation becoming entrenched. To quantify this trade-off, an
empirical non-linear model that incorporates financial stability conditions can be used to gauge the
tail risks to the euro area economy posed by the tightening cycle which began in the third quarter of
73 See also Karadi, P. and Nakov, A., “Effectiveness and addictiveness of quantitative easing”. Journal of
Monetary Economics, Vol. 117, 2021, pp. 1096-1117, and Van der Ghote, A., “Interactions and
Coordination between Monetary and Macroprudential Policies”, American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics, Vol. 13(1), 2021, pp. 1-34.
ECB Annual Report 2023 75
2022.74 The non-linear modelling approach has the advantage of capturing the possibly time-
varying feedbacks between monetary policy and the risks of future financial instability. While rare,
episodes of financial instability can have devastating macroeconomic consequences, making them
acutely relevant to policymakers. As such, tools to assess these tail events can play an important
role in informing policymakers aiming to manage macroeconomic risks.
The analysis revealed substantial downside risks to economic growth as of the third quarter of
2022. The model estimates a 10% probability that real GDP in the euro area would decline by more
than 3% over the following year. Risks to financial stability were also tilted to the downside, with an
elevated probability of stress in the financial system. These risks, driven by the jump in commodity
prices and financial market stress following the Russian invasion of Ukraine, had to be balanced
with upside risks to inflation, which was well above target.
Policy tightening above market expectations would have amplified short-term downside risks to
growth and financial stability. This is because the probability of short-term financial distress is
particularly sensitive to monetary policy. In the medium term, however, tighter monetary policy may
also dampen financial stability risks by reducing the leverage of the financial system and raising risk
premia across financial assets. The model quantifies the effects of tighter monetary policy on higher
near-term and lower medium-term risks to the financial system and real economy.
74 See also Chavleishvili, S. and Manganelli, S., “Forecasting and stress testing with quantile vector
autoregression”, Journal of Applied Econometrics, forthcoming, and Chavleishvili, S., Kremer, M. and
Lund-Thomsen, F., “Quantifying financial stability trade-offs for monetary policy: a quantile VAR
approach”, Working Paper Series, No 2833, ECB, 2023.
ECB Annual Report 2023 76
9 ECB legal activities and duties
This chapter deals with the jurisdiction of the Court of Justice of the European Union
(CJEU) concerning the ECB, provides information on ECB opinions and cases of
non-compliance with the obligation to consult the ECB on draft legislation falling
within its fields of competence. It also reports on the ECB’s monitoring of compliance
with the prohibition of monetary financing and privileged access.
9.1 Jurisdiction of the Court of Justice of the European Union
concerning the ECB
The CJEU put an end to more than In September 2023 the CJEU dismissed the appeal in the last pending action for
a decade of litigation relating to the
damages brought against the ECB and the European Union (EU) by holders of
2012 restructuring of the Greek
public debt by dismissing the Greek sovereign bonds. The appellants were subject to the restructuring of the
appeal on the last pending action
Greek public debt in 2012 by means of the activation of retrofit collective action
for damages against the ECB
clauses.75 At first instance, the appellants alleged that their forced participation in the
restructuring of the Greek public debt was attributable to the ECB and the EU owing
to, among other things, the involvement of the ECB and EU in the Eurogroup
meetings and their role in the consultation process leading to the activation of retrofit
collective action clauses.76 The General Court found that the ECB and the EU did
not act ultra vires and did not commit any breach of the right to property, the free
movement of capital or the principle of equal treatment. The General Court also held
that several provisions of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union
invoked by the applicants (including Articles 123 and 127) do not constitute rules of
law conferring rights on individuals and therefore cannot give rise to non-contractual
liability on the part of either the EU or the ECB. The appeal, which alleged erroneous
examination of certain pleas by the General Court, was dismissed by the CJEU in its
entirety, thus putting an end to more than a decade of litigation in which the ECB has
always prevailed by demonstrating that it acted lawfully.
The CJEU interpreted that the In April 2023 the CJEU (Fifth Chamber) delivered its judgment in a preliminary ruling
ECB’s minimum standards for
procedure submitted by the Supreme Administrative Court of Lithuania (Case C-
checking the fitness of euro
banknotes do not apply to cash 772/21). The CJEU interpreted that the ECB’s minimum standards for automated
handlers, such as credit institutions
checking of the fitness of euro banknotes by banknote handling machines, referred
and transporters of funds
to in Article 6(2) of ECB Decision (ECB/2010/14) on fitness checking of euro
banknotes, do not apply to cash handlers, such as Brink’s Lithuania. In the main
proceedings, Brink’s challenged Lietuvos bankas’ decision according to which
Brink’s was in breach of the ECB’s minimum standards, as two of its banknote
handling machines had failed the fitness test (which was based on such standards).
The CJEU determined that the ECB’s minimum standards apply to the
manufacturers of banknote handling machines. While cash handlers are not bound
by those standards, they remain obliged to remedy a situation where an inspection
75 Case C-262/22 P, EU:C:2023:714.
76 Case T-868/16, EU:T:2022:58.
ECB Annual Report 2023 77
by a national central bank (NCB) finds that banknote handling machines do not
comply with the ECB’s minimum standards. The CJEU also concluded that Member
States are precluded from obliging cash handlers to comply with the ECB’s minimum
standards, as introducing such an obligation under national law would not respect
the EU’s exclusive competence in the area of monetary policy, which includes
checking the authenticity and fitness of banknotes.
The CJEU confirmed limits on the In May 2023 the CJEU clarified the scope of judicial review from EU courts over the
judicial review of banking
ECB decision adopted in the field of banking supervision on the basis of a
supervisory decisions based on a
broad discretion discretionary power involving complex technical, economic and financial
assessments. The ruling of the CJEU followed an appeal by the ECB against the
judgment of the General Court of April 2021 by which it annulled the ECB’s decision
refusing to authorise Crédit Lyonnais to exclude from the calculation of its leverage
ratio certain exposures deriving from the amounts collected on regulated saving
accounts. The General Court considered that the decision was vitiated by a manifest
error of assessment because the ECB failed to take into account that those accounts
were not subject to a risk of massive withdrawals and, as a consequence, were not
exposing the bank to a risk of fire sales. The CJEU, upholding the ECB’s arguments,
annulled the judgment of the General Court, ruling that the scope of judicial review
from EU courts over ECB decisions adopted on the basis of a discretionary power
must be limited and not lead the General Court substituting its own assessment for
that of the ECB. That review must only seek to ascertain that the decision is not
based on materially incorrect facts or vitiated by a manifest error of assessment or
misuse of powers. In the case at hand, the CJEU considered that the General Court
substituted its own assessment regarding the risk of fire sales of assets to which the
bank was exposed for that of the ECB and, as a consequence, overstepped the
limits of judicial review. Giving final judgment in the case, the CJEU dismissed Crédit
Lyonnais’s action at first instance in annulment of the contested decision, ruling that
the bank failed to demonstrate that the ECB decision was vitiated by a manifest error
of assessment.
The Court confirmed that the ECB In September 2023 the CJEU77 dismissed the appeal of Versobank AS against the
has exclusive competence to
judgment of the General Court of 6 October 2021, which had rejected the annulment
withdraw banking licences,
including for serious breaches of action against the ECB’s decision to withdraw the bank’s authorisation to operate as
national AML/TF legislation
a credit institution. In this judgment, the CJEU confirmed that the ECB has exclusive
competence to withdraw the banking licence of all credit institutions established in
participating Member States, regardless of their classification as significant
institutions or less significant institutions, including on grounds relating to serious
breaches of the national legislation transposing the AML Directive.
9.2 ECB opinions and cases of non-compliance
Articles 127(4) and 282(5) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union
require that the ECB be consulted on any proposed EU or draft national legislation
falling within its fields of competence. All ECB opinions are published on EUR-Lex. In
77 Case C-803/21 P.
ECB Annual Report 2023 78
2023 the ECB adopted 12 opinions on proposed Union legal acts and 35 opinions on
draft national legislation.
There were 12 cases of non- Twelve cases of non-compliance with the obligation to consult the ECB on draft
compliance with the obligation to
legislation were recorded: two in respect of Union legal acts and ten in respect of
consult the ECB on draft legislation
national laws. The ECB adopted own initiative opinions in respect of seven of these
twelve cases.
The first EU case concerned an EU proposal for a regulation on harmonised rules on
fair access to and use of data (Data Act). This case was considered to be clear and
important because it concerns, among other things, the scope of access to and use
of privately held data by the ECB and the NCBs for a number of defined public
interest purposes. The second EU case concerned an EU legislative package
proposing the establishment of a European Single Access Point (ESAP) providing
centralised access to publicly available information of relevance to financial services,
capital markets and sustainability. This case was considered to be clear and
important because the establishment of an ESAP is an important milestone in the
completion of the capital markets union, which should allow for a more efficient
allocation of capital across the Union, contributing to the further development and
integration of capital markets.
Two Hungarian non-compliance cases concerned central bank independence and
the prohibition of monetary financing. The first Hungarian case concerned a
Hungarian law on economic and financial measures, which prohibited certain
institutions from purchasing, until 30 June 2023, a Hungarian forint-denominated
debt instrument issued by an ESCB national central bank. This case was considered
to be clear and important because it impedes the Magyar Nemzeti Bank from
independently choosing the necessary means and instruments to conduct an
efficient monetary policy and to independently achieve its primary objective of price
stability. The second Hungarian case concerned amendments of the Law on the
Magyar Nemzeti Bank introducing single foreign currency treasury accounts, which
will be managed by the Magyar Nemzeti Bank, to supplement the already existing
single Hungarian forint treasury account. This case was considered to be clear and
important because it concerns the compliance of the remuneration of the State’s
treasury accounts of an NCB with the monetary financing prohibition.
Two Slovak non-compliance cases concerned cash. The first Slovak case concerned
a Slovak law on social insurance limiting cash payments for public social insurance
contributions. This case was considered to be clear and important owing to the
limitation it imposes on the use of cash as a means of payment and the absence of a
proportionality assessment of this limitation, taking into account the criteria
established by the CJEU in its Hessischer Rundfunk judgment (C-422/19 and C-
423/19). The second Slovak case concerned a Slovak law amending the Constitution
of the Slovak Republic, which guarantees the issuance of cash as legal tender,
further specifies that everyone has the right to make a payment for the purchase of
goods and the provision of services using cash as legal tender, guarantees that the
acceptance of such payment may only be refused for reasonable or generally
applicable reasons, and guarantees the right to perform a cash transaction in a bank
or a branch of a foreign bank. This case was considered to be clear and important
ECB Annual Report 2023 79
because the constitutional law guarantees the issuance of cash as legal tender and
in this context sets out a general principle of mandatory acceptance of cash and a
framework for exemptions in a Member State whose currency is the euro, which are
matters falling within the exclusive competence of the ECB and the Union.
Five national non-compliance cases (four non-consultations and one late
consultation) relate to special purpose bank tax and levies introduced in response to
increased inflation and interest rates. These cases concerned: (1) a Polish law on
crowdfunding for business ventures and assistance to borrowers, which introduced
the concept of “mortgage holidays” to alleviate the burden on borrowers with
outstanding mortgage loans following recent increases in interest rates by Narodowy
Bank Polski; (2) a Portuguese law on a measure to temporarily reduce the
benchmark Euribor rates by 30% for variable rate mortgage loans, which aims at
mitigating the effects of rising interest rates on the residential mortgage market and
provide greater predictability for families with variable rate mortgages; (3) a
Romanian law on certain fiscal-budgetary measures to ensure the long-term financial
sustainability of Romania, which concerns, among other things, the imposition of a
turnover tax on credit institutions that are Romanian legal entities or Romanian
branches of foreign legal entities; (4) a Slovak law on a special levy on business in
regulated industries by (a) extending the scope of the regulated persons that are
subject to a special levy to include credit institutions doing business in Slovakia, and
(b) imposing a specific levy rate on these credit institutions; and (5) a Latvian law
amending the Consumer Protection Law, which provides that during the year 2024
credit institutions will be under an obligation to pay a mortgage borrower protection
fee for the benefit of borrowers who fulfil certain conditions. These cases were
considered to be clear and important because the laws raise financial stability,
prudential supervisory and, in the Latvian, Portuguese and Slovak cases, also
monetary policy considerations.
The final national non-compliance case is a Spanish case concerning a law requiring
the Banco de España to take the necessary measures to make it possible for
investment firms to open accounts with the central bank in order to deposit the funds
they receive from their customers. This case was considered to be clear and
important because, apart from its direct impact on the operation of payment systems,
it might raise issues relating to monetary policy and financial stability.
The ECB adopted 12 opinions on The ECB adopted 12 opinions on EU legislative proposals, covering topics such as a
proposed Union legal acts
digital euro; the legal tender of euro banknotes and coins; the reform of economic
governance in the Union; the Union’s crisis management and deposit insurance
framework; measures to mitigate excessive exposures to third-country central
counterparties (CCPs), improve the efficiency of Union clearing markets, and
address the treatment of concentration risk towards CCPs and counterparty risk on
centrally cleared derivative transactions; instant credit transfers in euro; climate-
related matters, including the energy performance of buildings, corporate
sustainability due diligence, and the transparency and integrity of environmental,
social and governance rating activities; European Union labour market statistics on
businesses; and the appointment of a new member of the ECB’s Executive Board.
ECB Annual Report 2023 80
The ECB adopted 35 opinions on With regard to opinions on national legislation, which often cover more than one
draft national legislation
subject, the ECB adopted 19 opinions concerning NCBs; 15 opinions concerning the
stability of the financial system; 13 opinions concerning the prudential supervision of
credit institutions; seven opinions concerning currency matters and means of
payment; five opinions concerning monetary policy instruments and operations and
the implementation of monetary policy; and three opinions concerning payment
and/or securities settlement systems. The topic of special purpose bank tax and
levies introduced in response to increased inflation and interest rates was the subject
of seven opinions in the course of 2023.
9.3 Compliance with the prohibition of monetary financing
and privileged access
Pursuant to Article 271(d) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union,
the ECB is entrusted with the task of monitoring the compliance of the EU national
central banks (NCBs) with the prohibitions laid down in Articles 123 and 124 of the
Treaty and Council Regulations (EC) Nos 3603/93 and 3604/93. Article 123 prohibits
the ECB and the NCBs from providing overdraft facilities or any other type of credit
facility to governments and EU institutions or bodies, as well as from purchasing in
the primary market debt instruments issued by these institutions. Article 124 prohibits
any measure, not based on prudential considerations, which establishes privileged
access by governments and EU institutions or bodies to financial institutions. In
parallel with the Governing Council of the ECB, the European Commission monitors
Member States’ compliance with the above provisions.
The ECB also monitors the EU central banks’ secondary market purchases of debt
instruments issued by the domestic public sector, the public sector of other Member
States and EU institutions and bodies. According to the recitals of Council
Regulation (EC) No 3603/93, the acquisition of public sector debt instruments in the
secondary market must not be used to circumvent the objective of Article 123 of the
Treaty.
The prohibitions laid down in The ECB’s monitoring exercise conducted for 2023 confirmed that Articles 123 and
Articles 123 and 124 of the Treaty
124 of the Treaty were in general respected.
were in general respected
The ECB will continue monitoring the involvement of the Magyar Nemzeti Bank in
the Budapest Stock Exchange as the purchase of the majority ownership of the
Budapest Stock Exchange by the Magyar Nemzeti Bank in 2015 may still be seen as
giving rise to monetary financing concerns.
The Central Bank of Ireland’s final disposal of assets related to the Irish Bank
Resolution Corporation during 2023 through sales of long-duration floating rate notes
has brought to an end the serious monetary financing concerns that had persisted
since 2013.
The financing by NCBs of obligations falling upon the public sector vis-à-vis the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) is not considered as monetary financing provided
ECB Annual Report 2023 81
it results in foreign claims that have all characteristics of reserve assets. However,
financial donations as provided in previous years by the Nationale Bank van
België/Banque Nationale de Belgique and Banque de France via the IMF for debt
relief for heavily indebted poor countries did not result in any foreign claims and
therefore require corrective measures.
ECB Annual Report 2023 82
10 The ECB in an EU and international
context
The ECB continued to interact closely with its European and international
counterparts in 2023. The connection between the ECB and the European
Parliament is an essential part of the ECB’s accountability framework. The ECB
engaged in regular hearings and correspondence with the Committee on Economic
and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament (ECON). Additionally, the ECB
interacted with ECON as part of its ongoing work on a digital euro. At international
level, the ECB engaged constructively in dialogue with its G20 partners. It supported,
among other things, the Indian Presidency’s initiatives on financial sector regulation,
cross-border payments and crypto-assets. The ECB also continued to engage in
central bank-relevant discussions on various issues related to the functioning of the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), including the review of IMF quotas, adjustments
to the IMF’s lending policies and toolkit, and matters surrounding Special Drawing
Rights (SDRs) and their channelling.
10.1 The ECB’s accountability
Accountability is an essential The ECB was granted independence under the Treaty on the Functioning of the
counterpart to independence
European Union (TFEU). Being independent means that the ECB can take decisions
in pursuit of its primary goal of maintaining price stability immune from political
influence. However, accountability is an essential counterpart to this independence.
The ECB is accountable for its actions to the European Parliament, which represents
EU citizens. Fulfilling these accountability obligations is a crucial part of the ECB’s
responsibilities. The two-way dialogue between the ECB and the European
Parliament allows the ECB to explain its actions and policies to the representatives
of EU citizens and to listen to their concerns. Over time this dialogue has evolved
beyond the requirements set out in Article 284(3) of the TFEU. To promote continued
common understanding and effective cooperation, in June 2023 the President of the
ECB and the President of the European Parliament signed an exchange of letters
clarifying the accountability arrangements between the ECB and the European
Parliament in the area of central banking.
The ECB continued its interactions In 2023 the President of the ECB took part in four regular hearings of the ECON
with EU citizens’ elected
Committee and engaged in the plenary debate on the ECB’s 2021 Annual Report in
representatives
February, following which the European Parliament issued a resolution. In May the
Vice-President then presented the ECB’s 2022 Annual Report to the ECON
Committee. On the same day, the ECB released its feedback on the input received
from the European Parliament as part of its resolution on the 2021 Annual Report.
Additionally, in May the ECB hosted the annual visit to the ECB by a delegation of
Members of the ECON Committee. In addition, the ECB responded to 27 written
questions from Members of European Parliament in the course of the year.
ECB Annual Report 2023 83
Furthermore, the ECB interacted closely with the ECON Committee in the context of
its work on a digital euro. In 2023 the then Executive Board Member Mr Panetta
participated in three ad hoc hearings of the ECON Committee to discuss progress
made during the digital euro investigation phase, including the topics of user
experience, legal tender, and the digital euro legislative process.78 The ECB also
organised staff-level technical seminars with the European Parliament and
participated in events organised by Members of the European Parliament to discuss
a digital euro.
Support for the euro was close to a According to the latest Eurobarometer survey conducted in October and November
record high in 2023
2023, 79% of euro area respondents support the euro and 43% tend to trust the
ECB. The high level of support for the euro is a very positive sign, while the relatively
lower level of trust in the ECB shows that the institution needs to continue its efforts
to communicate with the public and citizens’ elected representatives. Building public
trust will also remain integral for the ECB going forward. As such, the ECB remains
committed to actively participating in constructive dialogue with the European
Parliament and citizens in the euro area.
10.2 International relations
G20
The G20 operated amid heightened The global economy during India’s G20 Presidency in 2023 continued to be
geopolitical tensions and in a
negatively affected by Russia’s war against Ukraine and, in the last quarter,
difficult global environment, working
towards preserving multilateralism increased uncertainty owing to the conflict in the Middle East. G20 finance ministers
and central bank governors were confronted with lower global growth, high
inflationary pressures and volatile energy prices. While disagreements among
members on geopolitical issues prevented the adoption of communiques at the
February and July 2023 meetings, the joint G20 Leader’s Declaration in New Delhi,
as well as the decision to admit the African Union as a future permanent member to
the G20, highlighted the membership’s efforts to preserve the forum’s effectiveness
and inclusiveness. The ECB welcomed and supported the Indian Presidency’s
initiatives to improve the regulatory framework in the banking and non-banking
sectors, facilitate cross-border payments and reach agreement on a G20 roadmap to
contain the risks from crypto-asset ecosystems. The ECB also supported the G20’s
efforts to scale up sustainable finance from private and public sources for the global
transition towards Net Zero. In view of the digital euro project, the G20 discussions
on the design choices and safeguards for central bank digital currencies were also a
high priority from the ECB’s perspective.
78 The ECB also kept the ECON Committee informed of the developments in the digital euro project via
four written letters from Mr Panetta to the ECON Chair.
ECB Annual Report 2023 84
Policy issues related to the IMF and the international financial
architecture
The ECB actively contributed to The ECB continued to play an active role in discussions about the international
discussions at the IMF. In 2023 the
monetary and financial system at the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and in other
IMF decided to increase its quota
resources, continued to adjust its fora, promoting the central bank perspective in common European positions taken in
toolkit and further supported
these fora.79 In 2023 key topics included the review of IMF quotas, adjustments to
Ukraine
the IMF’s lending policies and toolkit, and matters surrounding Special Drawing
Rights (SDRs) and their channelling.
On 15 December 2023 the IMF Board of Governors concluded the 16th General
Review of Quotas and approved an increase of members’ quotas by 50%, which will
bring total IMF quotas to SDR 715.7 billion.80 The quota increase will be allocated to
members in proportion to their existing quota shares. Adjustments to the IMF toolkit
were introduced, which also enabled the Fund’s continued support for Ukraine.81 A
48-month arrangement under the Extended Fund Facility for Ukraine was approved
at the end of March 2023.82 The IMF also further strengthened the preventive role
and flexibility of its toolkit by concluding the review of precautionary instruments in
October 2023. At the end of 2023 IMF lending remained close to its highest historical
levels: the total General Resources Account credit outstanding stood at around
SDR 92 billion, with the exposure to the Fund’s largest borrower accounting for one-
third of this amount.
Resources were mobilised to help In a follow up to the allocation of USD 650 billion of SDRs in 2021 to meet a long-
countries in need
term global need to supplement existing reserves, which also helped countries to
deal with the pandemic, efforts to channel SDRs or equivalent resources to further
help emerging market economies and low-income countries reached a milestone in
June 2023, when the global ambition to mobilise USD 100 billion was met. EU
Member States made a major contribution to this effort, accounting for over 31% of
commitments. The bulk of the global target is destined for the IMF’s Resilience and
Sustainability Trust and Poverty Reduction and Growth Trust. The ECB also
continued to support international initiatives to help vulnerable countries tackle rising
debt vulnerabilities, in particular implementation of the G20 Common Framework for
Debt Treatments.
79 The ECB has observer status at the IMF, with a permanent ECB representative at the IMF
headquarters in Washington, D. C. The ECB observer participates in selected IMF Executive Board
meetings.
80 Quotas are denominated in Special Drawing Rights (SDRs), the IMF’s unit of account, and reviewed at
regular intervals.
81 These adjustments included temporarily increasing access limits (under both the General Resources
Account and Poverty Reduction and Growth Trust) and introducing a new Framework for Upper Credit
Tranche Financing in situations of exceptionally high uncertainty.
82 Two subsequent programme reviews were concluded in July and December 2023.
ECB Annual Report 2023 85
Box 8
The ECB’s secondary objective in monetary policy
The ECB’s primary objective, maintaining price stability, is established in Article 127(1) of the Treaty
on the Functioning of the European Union. The Treaty further stipulates that, “without prejudice to
the objective of price stability”, the ECB shall also support the general economic policies in the
European Union with a view to contributing to the achievement of the Union’s objectives, as laid
down in Article 3 of the Treaty on European Union.83 This box explains how the secondary objective
is considered in the conduct of the ECB’s monetary policy and reporting activities.84
How the ECB acts upon its secondary objective in monetary policy decisions
In its monetary policy decisions, the ECB evaluates the proportionality of each measure.85 This
assessment includes an analysis of the benefits and possible side effects of monetary policy
measures, including – where relevant – their impact on the ECB’s secondary objective. The
analysis considers how these measures interact and balance out over time. In practice, when
adjusting its monetary policy instruments, the Governing Council chooses the configuration that
best supports the general economic policies in the Union related to growth, employment and social
inclusion, and that, with a view to contributing to the Union’s broader objectives, protects financial
stability and helps to mitigate the impact of climate change, provided that two configurations of the
instrument set are equally conducive and not prejudicial to price stability.86 For instance, the ECB
has been tilting its reinvestments of corporate sector securities towards issuers with a better climate
performance since October 2022. This decision was made in order to take better account of
climate-related financial risk in the Eurosystem balance sheet and, with reference to the ECB’s
secondary objective, to support the green transition of the economy in line with the EU’s climate
neutrality objectives.87
How the ECB presents the effects of its actions on the secondary objective
The ECB communicates on how it has acted upon its secondary objective as part of its reporting on
monetary policy. During monetary policy press conferences and in the detailed accounts of its
monetary policy meetings, the ECB provides insights into the relevant factors influencing its
monetary policy decisions, including considerations related to its secondary objective. Additionally,
regular articles in the Economic Bulletin and the Research Bulletin, as well as dedicated occasional
papers, offer in-depth analyses on how monetary policy interacts with crucial areas like the labour
market, financial stability and climate change.88 Furthermore, the ECB – in discharging its
accountability and transparency obligations toward the European Parliament and the public –
elaborates on how aspects of the secondary objective, such as the interplay between price stability
83 Article 3(3) of the Treaty on European Union provides, inter alia, that the Union shall work for “the
sustainable development of Europe based on balanced economic growth and price stability, a highly
competitive social market economy, aiming at full employment and social progress, and a high level of
protection and improvement of the quality of the environment.”
84 See also European Parliament Resolution on the ECB’s Annual Report 2021 and the ECB’s feedback
statement to this Resolution.
85 Proportionality implies that the ECB’s actions must, first, be suitable for attaining the legitimate
objectives of the action at issue and, second, must not go manifestly beyond what is necessary to
achieve those objectives. For more information, see Case C-62/14, Peter Gauweiler and Others
(EU:C:2015:400) and Case C-493/17, Heinrich Weiss and Others (EU:C:2018:1000).
86 For more information, see Section 3.3 of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy overview.
87 For more information on the Eurosystem’s climate-related tilting since October 2022, see Section
11.5.1.
88 See the Occasional Papers that fed into the ECB’s strategy review.
ECB Annual Report 2023 86
and financial stability or the integration of climate change considerations into monetary policy
operations, are being addressed.89
In the ECB’s annual reports, the reporting on monetary policy decisions and the underlying
analyses of relevance to the secondary objective is integrated across various chapters. Notably, the
Annual Report for 2023: (i) provides an update on advances made during 2023 in the ECB’s
analytical capacity with regard to climate change in statistics, including new climate-related
statistical indicators for sustainable finance, carbon emissions and physical risks (Section 7.2); (ii)
recalls that the medium-term orientation of the ECB’s monetary policy allowed for a gradual impact
on growth and employment, which are elements of the ECB’s secondary objective (Section 1.2); (iii)
recalls that the ECB continued to tilt corporate bond purchases more strongly towards issuers with
a better climate performance (Sections 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3) and made climate-related financial
disclosures for the corporate securities holdings under the corporate sector purchase programme
and the pandemic emergency purchase programme (Section 2.2); (iv) provides a summary
assessment of banks and the financial system and elaborates on sources of resilience and fragility
for financial stability (Chapter 3) and reports on recent ECB research on quantifying the financial
stability trade-offs for monetary policy during periods of high inflation (Box 7); and (v) provides a
summary of the ECB’s efforts and progress in climate and environmental work (Section 11.5).
89 Coordinators of political groups in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs (ECON
Committee) in the European Parliament decide on two topics for each hearing with the ECB President
which can be found on the ECON Committee’s website. These topics are addressed by the ECB
President in the introductory remarks.
ECB Annual Report 2023 87
11 Promoting good governance, social and
environmental sustainability
The ECB carries out key work on environmental, social and governance (ESG)
issues. For a public institution like the ECB, this includes its accountability vis-à-vis
European Union (EU) citizens and their elected representatives, communicating and
engaging with different audiences, adhering to the highest ethical standards and
transparency, empowering employees and promoting their well-being, as well as
looking at climate and environmental impacts and risks.
11.1 Updates on environmental, social and governance
matters
The ECB continued its work on This overview of key ESG developments in 2023 is complemented by other sections
environmental, social and
of this annual report and additional information available on the ECB’s website
governance-related topics in 2023
(Table 11.1).
Sections 11.2 and 11.3 outline how, as a European institution, the ECB worked
towards continuously strengthening its governance frameworks as well as fostering
transparency and closeness to citizens in 2023. Section 11.2 outlines the ECB’s
efforts to strengthen European and international cooperation in the areas of ethics,
integrity and good conduct, thereby also responding to increased public interest in
this area.90 Section 11.3 describes the concerted efforts by the ECB to clearly
explain its policies during a period of high inflation, targeting different audiences and
addressing people’s concerns about the future of our currency. Section 11.4 lists key
developments in 2023 that affected the ECB’s human resources management and
provides updates on the appointment of a diversity and inclusion officer and a
mediator. Lastly, Section 11.5 covers the ECB’s work on climate-related and
environmental topics and provides details on more specialised publications in this
area.
Table 11.1
ECB websites and publications
Governance Social Environmental
Governance and corporate governance Transparency and accountability Climate change and the ECB
Organisation Communication Climate change and banking supervision
Ethics Diversity and inclusion Environmental protection at the ECB
Legal framework Arts and culture Banknotes’ environment, health and safety
90 Section 10.1 also outlines the ECB’s fulfilment of its duties as a public institution through its
accountability framework and communication to the public.
ECB Annual Report 2023 88
Climate-related risks are The ECB tackles ESG risks as part of its risk management frameworks for financial
progressively being integrated into
and non-financial risks, as described in the chapter on risk management in the
the overall risk framework
ECB’s Annual Accounts 2023.
Climate stress testing started in 2022 and has since become a regular exercise. It
forms part of the action to progressively integrate climate-related risks into the
overall risk framework. In its first climate risk stress test of the Eurosystem balance
sheet, the ECB assessed the sensitivity of the Eurosystem’s financial risk profile to
climate change and in doing so enhanced the Eurosystem’s climate risk assessment
capabilities. The results provided a first estimate of the impact of climate risk on the
ECB’s balance sheet.
11.2 Strengthening ethics and integrity
Awareness of ethics and integrity The ECB’s Compliance and Governance Office (CGO) is entrusted with setting the
remained a key priority in 2023
appropriate rules on ethics and governance, and monitoring compliance with these.
In 2023 new initiatives focused on providing an enhanced training experience to
staff, ranging from introductory courses and e-learning programmes for newcomers,
to refresher courses for longer-serving staff and tailormade training to address the
needs of specific business functions. Various outreach projects were also organised
over a period of six to eight weeks around Global Ethics Day, with a view to both
drawing ECB staff’s attention to the need to comply with the ethics rules and
informing the public of the ECB’s focus on these matters. The CGO continued to
upgrade and streamline its processes, facilitate staff access to ethics advice and
comply with the ECB’s ethics standards.
Increased awareness in the areas of ethics and integrity and easy access to ethical
advice led to a pronounced increase in requests from 1,690 in 2022 to 2,767 in 2023
(Chart 11.1).
The compliance checks, which were conducted with the support of an external audit
firm, confirmed the overall adherence of ECB staff members and the ECB members
of high-level bodies to the rules on private financial transactions.
ECB Annual Report 2023 89
Chart 11.1
Overview of requests received from ECB staff in 2023
Source: ECB.
The ECB’s independent Ethics Committee complements the ECB’s governance
structure. It provides advice to high-level ECB officials on questions of ethics, mostly
concerning private activities and post-mandate gainful employment, and assesses
their declarations of interests. In addition, the Ethics Committee monitors European
and international developments in the field of ethics and good conduct. It also
advises on desirable updates of the ECB’s ethics framework for high-level ECB
officials, such as the recent enhancement of the rules on private financial
transactions.
The Ethics and Compliance Committee continued to provide support to the national
central banks and national competent authorities on the implementation of the Ethics
Guidelines adopted in 2021, as well as guidance on a coherent and consistent
interpretation of ethics standards across the Eurosystem. In addition, to best
leverage and benefit from a diversity of views, the Committee organised sessions on
topics of mutual interest, which were attended by over 50 different public institutions
and organisations.
At the European level, in 2023 the ECB continued to play an active role in the
ongoing interinstitutional negotiations on the establishment of an independent EU
ethics body.
At international level, the ECB was closely involved in knowledge-sharing and
standard-setting in the Ethics Network of Multilateral Organizations, in both its role
as Vice-Chair of the network and through its contributions to meetings and the
annual conference. The ECB also contributed to the first review of the EU’s
implementation of the United Nations Convention against Corruption.
ECB Annual Report 2023 90
11.3 Communication and transparency of ECB policy
The ECB faced a challenging Falling, but still much too high, inflation and the increasingly tangible effects of the
communications environment
ECB policy tightening on the economy created a challenging communications
environment for the ECB in 2023. In times of exceptional uncertainty and a cost-of-
living crisis, the focus of ECB communication had to be on reassuring people and
businesses about its commitment to bring inflation back to target and convince them
that it would be able to do so with the key policy tools at its disposal.
The ECB’s guiding principle for The ECB therefore stepped up its monetary policy communication. As monetary
communications was “Explain,
policy tightening started to produce its intended effect of dampening demand, it was
Explain, Explain” to help people
understand its decisions important to explain the ECB’s decisions, and re-emphasise that its primary mandate
is to fight inflation. Alongside multiple public speaking engagements by ECB
decision-makers, several posts on The ECB Blog explained how inflation affected
real incomes and the importance of governments’ structural policies for tackling
inflation, and provided analytical insights on record high labour participation levels.
ECB podcasts described the drivers of inflation and, through a dedicated podcast
summer school, elaborated on the ECB’s role in keeping prices stable.
Humility in communication to At the same time, legitimate questions about why the ECB had failed to foresee the
rebuild public trust
inflation surge and why its macroeconomic projections had been off the mark
required answers. The clarity and accuracy of the Eurosystem projections are
especially important to anchor expectations and bolster the credibility of ECB policy.
Similarly, it was essential to explain the various sources of uncertainty and
communicate with a sense of humility as a means of fostering trust.
ECB communications strived to put In 2023, as a consequence of past monetary policy decisions, notably large-scale
balance sheet losses of the ECB
asset purchases, the ECB and other central banks across the Eurosystem were
and Eurosystem central banks into
context confronted with losses on their balance sheets. The ECB made a special effort to
explain where central bank profits and losses come from, for instance, via a
dedicated explainer. This also allowed the ECB to place those losses in the context
of many years of significant profits and to emphasise that its job is to take monetary
policy decisions that further its price stability objective, and not to make profits.
Further extraordinary communications efforts in 2023 centred on the future of our
currency, both in the form of cash and in a digital form.
The ECB started work on designing The ECB decided that the design of the third series of euro banknotes should include
the next series of euro banknotes
a participatory process involving the wider public. To that end, Europeans across the
with the help of the European public
euro area were invited to participate in an online survey on the themes of the next
banknote series and were given a chance to select their preferred design theme from
among seven options. More than 365,000 people from across the euro area took
part, and their preferences were taken on board in the Governing Council’s decision
to select “European culture” and “Rivers and birds” as themes for future banknotes.
The communication and outreach around the next series of banknotes reinforced the
message that the ECB and the Eurosystem remain committed to cash.
The ECB stressed that cash is here Conveying its commitment to cash in 2023 was especially important, because the
to stay – potentially complemented
ECB is preparing for a possible introduction of a digital euro.
by a digital euro
ECB Annual Report 2023 91
In October 2023 the Governing Council decided to close the investigation phase of
the digital euro project and move forward to the preparation phase. That step was
accompanied by a multi-pronged and multilingual communications campaign,
involving a variety of communication channels and products across all euro area
countries, including an official LinkedIn page on the digital euro project and a
dedicated web page on the digital euro project. The campaign focused on the
benefits and importance of introducing a digital euro, privacy concerns, and the legal
tender role of both cash and the new digital currency. Beyond communicating to
industry stakeholders, policymakers and civil society organisations, in an innovative
approach, the ECB also reached out to relevant online content creators. The aim
was to encourage digital entrepreneurs active in the field of money and finance to set
out the rationale for a digital euro and explain its features to their online followers
and subscribers.
Overall, these combined efforts and the ensuing broad media coverage succeeded
in publicising the digital euro project and building further understanding. Analysis
shows that while, at first, interest in a digital euro was greatest among younger
generations of Europeans, awareness and understanding have now spread across
all age groups.
2023 was also the year in which the ECB celebrated its 25th anniversary. On that
occasion, the ECB organised an event attended by the top representatives of
European Union institutions, the ECB’s host country, Germany, and other euro area
countries, as well as by former ECB presidents, Jean-Claude Trichet and Mario
Draghi. In addition, at the end of 2023 and start of 2024 the ECB, together with other
EU institutions, jointly commemorated 25 years of the euro. These historical
milestones allowed the ECB to highlight the success of the single currency, its
benefits for the people of Europe as a beacon of stability around the world and a
symbol of European unity.
Connecting with younger people With a view to connecting with younger people in particular, in 2023 the ECB ran the
through the “Stability is our thing”
“Stability is our thing” campaign on social media. This aimed to explain in an
social media campaign
interactive and personal way core aspects about the ECB and its work: the price
stability target, the role of banking supervision and how the ECB’s decisions affect
everyday life. The campaign posts were seen 166 million times and reached 43
million young people.
There were more public access Public access to ECB documents is an integral component of the ECB’s
requests compared with 2022,
transparency policy. It promotes the ECB's openness and enhances its democratic
including a marked increase for
access to documents on legitimacy.
institutional and governance topics
In 2023 the ECB received more requests (73 requests) for access to documents
compared with 2022 (63 requests). Whereas requests continued to cover a wide
range of topics, including supervisory issues or high-profile initiatives like the digital
euro project, there was a marked increase in requests for access to documents on
institutional and governance topics, reflecting greater public interest in such matters.
In line with the ECB’s commitment to transparency, documents released in response
to requests for public access were generally made available via the ECB’s Public
ECB Annual Report 2023 92
Register of Documents. Moreover, with a view to enhancing transparency, the ECB
prepared an overview of the topics covered in requests for access to documents
received by the ECB since 2004.
No findings of maladministration were raised by the European Ombudsman
regarding the ECB’s handling of public access requests.
The ECB’s initiatives to support transparency, openness and closeness to citizens
were acknowledged through its nomination to the shortlist for the European
Ombudsman’s Award for Good Administration 2023 for “helping EU citizens
understand monetary policy in times of high inflation”.
11.4 Empowering our people to excel for Europe
In the context of the gradual return to the office from 2022 onwards, the ECB
focused on policies and programmes to support work-life balance, staff development
and organisational resilience. A new teleworking policy was put in place in January
2023 that supports flexibility for staff and trainees. In 2023 the new virtual learning
platform, EUREKA, was made available to institutions across the European System
of Central Banks and Single Supervisory Mechanism, providing even more access to
learning and mobility opportunities. In line with its objective of establishing a culture
of lived inclusion, the ECB appointed a mediator and an HR diversity and inclusion
adviser.
Working culture
The ECB launched its new Following a transition phase in 2022, a new teleworking policy took effect on 1
teleworking policy
January 2023. Based on the overall positive experiences during the period of remote
working, the new policy provides flexible teleworking options to staff. It allows all
ECB staff and trainees to telework up to 110 days per year, subject to compatibility
with business needs.
ECB Annual Report 2023 93
Figure 11.1
Teleworking by ECB staff in 2023
Source: ECB.
Note: Data as at January 2024.
Training was offered to cultivate an The ECB places value on listening to staff and conducted a pulse survey at the
enduring culture of mutual respect
beginning of 2023. Survey results showed that staff remained engaged, committed
and connected to the work of the ECB. However, there is still work to be done to
strengthen working culture. As a follow-up to the survey, the Executive Board
championed an initiative to promote an organisational culture in which employees
learn to respond effectively to inappropriate behaviour. Interactive workshops were
introduced to help strengthen a “speak up” culture and how we all work together.
Talent development
ECB staff took advantage of 2023 was an important year for staff mobility in the ESCB and SSM. The ECB’s new
opportunities for mobility
learning platform, EUREKA, offered for the first time a centralised view of learning
and mobility opportunities across other institutions in the ESCB and SSM. EUREKA
promotes knowledge-sharing and collaboration, and is available to ECB staff as well
as all ESCB and SSM staff. Under the fifth edition of the Schuman Programme
launched in 2023, 41 projects were offered as secondment opportunities, allowing
staff exchanges between the ECB, national competent authorities (NCAs) and
national central banks (NCBs). The ECB also continued to exchange staff members
with several NCAs and European institutions, as part of a dedicated SSM swap
programme. By the end of 2023 nine swaps were in place with two NCAs (Banco de
España, the French Prudential Supervision and Resolution Authority) and one
agency (European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority).
ECB Annual Report 2023 94
The ECB continued to foster The ECB continued its Leadership Growth Programme to develop leadership
leadership and professional growth
competencies and increase leadership effectiveness. Furthermore, it organised the
last seven cohorts of the Women’s Leadership Programme, a successful programme
launched in 2014 aimed at achieving a higher representation of women at the ECB.
Another important development opportunity was offered in the form of the Mentoring
Portal, which allows staff and trainees to offer mentoring and look for mentors. By
the end of 2023 it had recorded nearly 100 mentor-mentee relationships.
Key initiatives were launched as Further key initiatives were launched as part of the ESCB & SSM Learning &
part of the ESCB and SSM learning
Development Strategy. NCAs and NCBs were onboarded to EUREKA, which
and development strategy
provides access to a wide range of ESCB and SSM-wide learning and development
opportunities. The flagship Central Banking & Banking Supervision Executive
Education Programme was launched in October 2023. Two successful “hackathons”
took place in the course of the year with participants from across the ESCB and
SSM. The first hackathon took place in February on the topic of decentralised
finance and a second one on climate change was held at the ECB’s premises in
November.
The ECB increased the traineeship By offering a traineeship programme, the ECB promotes European integration of
grant
young graduate students and gives them an opportunity to acquire practical
experience and put into practice the knowledge they have acquired during their
studies. At the same time, the ECB benefits from trainees’ knowledge of the current
state of academic research as well as their enthusiasm and fresh ideas. As of
1 December 2023 the traineeship grant increased to €1,170 per month, and to
€2,120 for PhD students having completed at least two years of their PhD studies for
traineeship vacancies at that level. Trainees also receive accommodation benefits.
Diversity and inclusion
The ECB continued to foster Mirroring European society and establishing a culture of lived inclusion is a long-term
diversity and inclusion
endeavour. To achieve this, the ECB strengthened its institutional basis by
supporting its six grass roots diversity and inclusion (D&I) networks and rolling out its
inclusion learning programme for staff, teams and leaders. To enable a culture
based on inclusion, mutual respect and psychological safety, two new roles were
created: as of 2023 the new Mediator prevents and addresses workplace frictions
through assisted dialogue, and the new HR D&I Adviser applies a D&I lens to all
people and culture topics.
Gender diversity and Throughout 2023 the ECB kept gender diversity high on its agenda while embracing
intersectionality were high on the
all facets of diversity and fostering an inclusive culture. This is reflected in EDGE
agenda
Move & EDGEplus certification, the ECB’s progress on the 2020-2026 gender
targets, the introduction of paid parental leave for the co-parent not giving birth,
piloting of a traineeship for talent on the autism spectrum, awareness sessions and
events on race and ethnicity, allyship, disability and LGBT+ inclusion.
The ECB continued targeted Tapping into the best talent of Europe, the ECB joined several career fairs for
outreach and talent acquisition
underrepresented groups, for example Europe’s largest career fair for black and
people of colour organised by ADAN (Afro Deutsches Akademiker Netzwerk), the
ECB Annual Report 2023 95
Sticks & Stones careers fair for LGBTIQ+ talent and allies and the herCAREER fair
for women’s career advancement. To attract applicants with disabilities, the ECB
promoted its vacancies on the myAbility platform. Strengthening its female pipeline
and being inclusive of different socioeconomic backgrounds, the ECB continued to
offer its ECB Scholarship for Women. In addition, and in a continued show of
solidarity and support, the ECB launched a scholarship for 15 Ukrainian students
enrolled in a Master’s degree in Ukraine.
ECB Annual Report 2023 96
Figure 11.2
The ECB workforce in figures
1 Data as at 31 December 2023.
2 Including 56 participants in the Graduate Programme.
3 Employees seconded from a national central bank of the European System of Central Banks, European public institutions/agencies
or international organisations.
4 Refers only to permanent staff members and staff with fixed-term positions.
5 Refers to any permanent or temporary horizontal move across divisions or business areas.
6 Refers to any permanent or temporary move to a higher salary band, with or without a recruitment.
7 Refers only to permanent staff members and staff with fixed-term convertible positions.
8 The table shows shares of ECB employees and trainees by nationality, i.e. staff members holding multiple nationalities are counted
for each nationality they declare. Totals may exceed 100% due to rounding and double nationalities. The countries are listed using the
alphabetical order of the country names in the respective national language.
ECB Annual Report 2023 97
11.5 Advancing work on environmental and climate-related
challenges
Understanding the implications of Climate change is advancing, and the longer we wait to reduce our emissions and to
climate change and the transition
transition to a greener economy, the higher the costs.91,92 Despite the progress
needs for the economy and
financial sector is essential for the made, the world is still not on track to limit the global temperature increase to 1.5°C
ECB to deliver on its mandate
above pre-industrial levels.93 This means that the risks related to a changing climate
and from an abrupt transition are growing, with impacts on monetary policy and the
stability of the financial and banking systems. It is therefore essential for the ECB to
understand the implications for the economy and financial sector to deliver on its
mandate.
That is why the ECB, under the coordination of the climate change centre, continued
to work on its climate agenda in cooperation with internal stakeholders and with the
Eurosystem via relevant committees and dedicated fora on climate. In 2023 the ECB
continued to integrate the objectives and environmental considerations of the
European Climate Law into its strategy-setting, projects and policymaking processes.
The ECB published its climate and In the past year the ECB worked on its climate and nature plan for 2024-2025, which
nature plan for 2024-2025
outlines the activities it will work on in order to achieve its strategic climate
objectives. It also identified three focus areas for action: navigating the transition to a
green economy, understanding the increased physical impact of climate change and
advancing work on nature-related risks.
Highlights of climate-related work
Concrete advances were made on multiple fronts, covering a wide range of the
ECB’s tasks (Figure 11.3).
In monetary policy implementation, the ECB published the first climate-related
financial disclosures of the Eurosystem’s corporate sector holdings in March 2023.
The carbon intensity of reinvestments decreased by more than 65% in the 12
months that followed the start of tilted reinvestments in October 2022. The
Governing Council strengthened the tilting parameter in February, when it decided to
reduce the Eurosystem’s holdings of securities. Since the discontinuation of
reinvestments under the asset purchase programme in July, tilting continues for the
corporate assets in the pandemic emergency purchase programme. The first review
of the climate score methodology in October 2023 concluded that the framework had
achieved its intended objectives and that its main building blocks would be
maintained. The decarbonisation of corporate sector portfolios is expected to
91 See “Faster green transition would benefit firms, households and banks, ECB economy-wide climate
stress test finds”, press release, ECB, 6 September 2023.
92 For more detailed information, see Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, “Climate Change
2023: Synthesis Report”, 2023 and World Meteorological Organization, “The Global Climate 2011-
2020: A Decade of Acceleration”, 5 December 2023.
93 See the United Nations Environment Programme, “Emissions Gap Report 2023” for more details on the
estimate that global warming under current unconditional Nationally Determined Contributions will
reach 2.9°C above pre-industrial levels this century.
ECB Annual Report 2023 98
continue throughout 2024 on a path that supports the goals of the Paris Agreement.
In addition, the Eurosystem continued preparatory work to incorporate climate
considerations into its collateral framework and enhance its risk assessment and
management.
Figure 11.3
Overview of key climate actions
Source: ECB.
The ECB explored the economic Extensive analytical work supported the task of informing policymakers, the financial
and financial impact of climate
sector and the public about the economic and financial impact of climate change and
change and the implications for its
tasks its implications for the ECB’s tasks.94 In 2023 the ECB continued to assess the
macroeconomic implications of climate change and mitigation policies and, in
particular, the impact of green fiscal measures on the Eurosystem/ECB staff
projections. A model-based analysis on the economic impact of carbon pricing found
modest adverse effects for the economy. Findings from the Survey on the Access to
Finance of Enterprises and the Bank Lending Survey indicate that euro area firms
are investing in the transition, and that bank lending conditions are tighter for firms
with high emissions and no credible plans to transition. On the implications for
monetary policy, recent analysis explored the effects of climate change on the
monetary policy transmission mechanism and found that, while the transition
increases the cost of credit and reduces lending to all firms, its contractionary effect
is milder for firms with low emissions and those that commit to decarbonisation.
Several research papers investigated the links between a changing climate and
inflation, finding that hotter temperatures can increase food inflation, but that
demand-side effects from hotter summers can dampen inflation in the longer run,
and that the effects are asymmetric across euro area economies (see Box 1). The
ECB also advanced its understanding of how climate change affects potential output.
In an effort to improve the availability of climate data, the European System of
Central Banks published climate change-related indicators on sustainable finance,
greenhouse gas emissions and physical risk (see Section 7.2).
94 See the list of ECB publications on climate change. In addition, some ECB research papers were
published in major academic journals.
ECB Annual Report 2023 99
The ECB is working on better The ECB further developed its stress testing methodology to explore the resilience of
understanding climate-related risks
the wider economy to different transition scenarios and the preparedness of
to the economy and financial
systems, and developing an supervised banks to deal with financial and economic shocks stemming from climate
adequate macroprudential
risk. In 2023 the ECB led the Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS)
response
workstream on scenario design and analysis, which published the fourth vintage of
its long-term macro-financial climate scenarios. The scenarios provide an initial,
common reference for analysing climate risks to the economy and financial system.
The framework acknowledges the uncertainty and limitations of climate and
economic modelling, for example with regards to tipping points. In collaboration with
the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority, the ECB developed
policy options to reduce the climate insurance protection gap, given that only one-
quarter of climate-related catastrophe losses in the EU are currently insured. The
ECB also analysed climate change risks to sovereigns that can have a negative
effect on financial stability and fiscal expenditures. The ECB and the European
Systemic Risk Board published a report that gathers evidence on the most important
financial stability indicators and develops a macroprudential framework for
addressing climate risk. The report also suggests that heavy economic dependence
on natural ecosystems could exacerbate climate-related financial stability risks.
With regard to ECB banking supervision, although the credit institutions supervised
under the Single Supervisory Mechanism made meaningful progress in their climate
and environmental-related risk management practices, a number of institutions did
not achieve the progress expected for March 2023. The ECB will continue to closely
monitor banks’ progress and, if needed, take enforcement actions.95
The ECB is working on improving Over the years the ECB has continuously improved the safety and sustainability of
the safety and sustainability of euro
euro banknotes throughout the cash cycle.96 In 2023 it published the environmental
banknotes
footprint study of euro banknotes as a payment instrument. The future euro
banknotes are being developed in line with eco-design principles, meaning that
environmental aspects are considered at all stages of the banknote development
process (see Section 6.2).
The ECB is analysing and Since 2021 ECB staff members have contributed to training courses and multilateral
contributing to policy discussions to
technical workshops with central banking peers and stakeholders outside the
scale up sustainable finance at EU
and international level European Union. It also participated in numerous working groups and events with
central banks and other institutions and fora to advance the climate agenda and
profit from regular exchanges. These include the NGFS, the Financial Stability
Board, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the European Supervisory
Authorities and the European Systemic Risk Board, the Bank for International
Settlements, the G7, G20 and the International Monetary Fund.
Innovative research by the ECB Innovative research on nature-related risks showed that degradation of ecosystems
investigated nature-related risks,
will pose challenges for companies and potentially propagate to banks, as almost
the climate-nature nexus and their
impact on the economy 75% of corporate loans in the euro area (nearly €3.24 trillion) are issued to
borrowers with a high level of dependency on ecosystem services. Additionally, the
95 More detailed information can be found on the ECB’s banking supervision website and in the 2023 ECB
Annual Report on supervisory activities.
96 For more information see the ECB web page on “The Eurosystem cash strategy” and the ECB’s
environmental statements.
ECB Annual Report 2023 100
ECB explored for the first time transition risks and the climate-nature nexus. Taking
into account climate change and land-use change as primary drivers of biodiversity
loss, the impact of euro area companies on nature is equivalent to the loss of 582
million hectares of “pristine” habitats worldwide. The research highlights the
importance of integrating climate change and nature loss in risk assessment
frameworks, as they are inextricably linked.
Work is undergoing to improve the In March 2023 the ECB started publishing its annual climate-related financial
environmental performance of the
disclosures of its non-monetary policy portfolios in addition to its annual
ECB’s own operations and non-
monetary policy portfolios environmental statement, which together give an overview of the ECB’s own
operational environmental impacts and the carbon footprint of its financed emissions
as well as the related targets.97 Updated data on the ECB’s environmental
performance in 2023 will be made available in the course of 2024.
Box 9
ECB keeping up with innovation
In 2023 the ECB continued to make progress on developing and implementing innovative solutions
that enhance the efficiency of its processes. Digital solutions, including artificial intelligence (AI),
machine learning, robots and chatbots have been deployed throughout the organisation.
On the central banking side, AI was deployed at the ECB to deepen understanding of price-setting
behaviour and inflation dynamics in the European Union (EU). Web scraping and machine learning
was applied to assemble a huge amount of real-time data on individual product prices.98 On the
banking supervision side, the SupTech programme initiated in 2019 has provided 14 tools that help
supervisors collect and analyse large volumes of quantitative and qualitative data, automatise
processes, better collaborate, and use AI to speed up and sharpen supervisory analysis.99
Deploying digital projects at the ECB relies on an innovation-friendly ecosystem. Beyond
technological solutions, innovation requires a growth mindset, curiosity and close cooperation
among all ECB stakeholders. For this purpose, interdisciplinary innovation teams involving IT,
knowledge management, central banking and banking supervision have developed innovative
approaches to working that facilitate project management, innovation scouting, incubation and
knowledge-sharing. Part of this ecosystem, the ECB’s digital document system and information
governance policy form a solid foundation for the development of AI by providing a vast resource of
structured digitalised documentation. In addition, cooperation with global innovation leaders in
public authorities, academia, start-ups and major industry players helps stimulate innovation within
the ECB, the Eurosystem and beyond. In particular, the ECB coordinates the actions of the
Eurosystem through the Eurosystem’s Innov8 Forum with the BIS Innovation Hub Eurosystem
Centre. The latter is a joint venture of the Bank for International Settlements and all Eurosystem
central banks. Offices in Frankfurt and Paris were opened in March 2023, hosted and supported by
97 Since 2010 the ECB has run a certified environmental management system to manage the
environmental footprint of its own operations, which has recently led to significant gains in energy
conservation.
98 For more information, see the webpage of the Price-setting Microdata Analysis Network (PRISMA) and
Moufakkir, M., “Careful embrace: AI and the ECB”, The ECB Blog, 28 September 2023.
99 See “Technology, data and innovation – shaping the future of supervision”, keynote speech by
Elizabeth McCaul, Member of the Supervisory Board of the ECB, at the Supervision Innovators
Conference 2023, Frankfurt am Main, 20 September 2023 and “How tech is shaping banking
supervision”, The ECB Podcast, 28 September 2023.
ECB Annual Report 2023 101
the Deutsche Bundesbank and Banque de France respectively. All members of the Eurosystem
Innov8 Forum contribute and share knowledge in the innovation space.
Finally, innovation is strongly promoted by the Executive Board. In February 2023 Executive Board
members participated for the first time in an Innovation Forum with a physical “market place-style”
format and live and interactive demonstrations of a sample of major ECB innovation projects.
ECB Annual Report 2023 102
12 Meet our people
On 1 June 1998 the European Central Bank started operating as the central bank for
the euro area with a clear mandate to maintain price stability. The ECB’s 25th
anniversary in 2023 was an opportunity to celebrate the many achievements of the
institution over this period. ECB colleagues who started off at the European
Monetary Institute, the precursor to the ECB, and have continued to work for the
institution right through to the present day share their personal experiences below. In
particular, they describe what it was like to work at a new institution with a start-up
feel and how they contributed to many important milestones as the ECB immediately
established its place among its peers and evolved over time.
Rita Choudhury, Senior Team Lead Economist-Statistician,
Directorate General Statistics
My career pathway at the ECB has been remarkably formative. It began with a leap
of faith, with a new job in a new country. I joined the ECB at its cusp, as a young
Research Analyst in the still-developing Statistics Function. With just a few hundred
employees, the ECB needed “all hands on deck”, so we juggled multiple roles. A
typical day was diverse: I discussed requirements with policy areas, designed
statistical frameworks, programmed code and drafted the occasional speech. With
institutional policies still in their infancy, I was also thrilled to see my creative
solutions often rapidly deployed.
As the ECB matured, avenues for professional growth opened up. I worked in
several different areas within Statistics and was able to deepen my levels of
expertise and seniority. Particularly memorable responsibilities included being lead
for country visits to our counterpart national central banks and national competent
authorities to foster relationships and advise on their reporting preparations as new
members of the euro area.
I am now in the newly established Data Office, which aims to optimise institutional
data management (including in areas like artificial intelligence) and reports to the
Chief Data Officer. I also contribute to the Diversity and Inclusion Forum. These are
transversal roles and it is satisfying to work with varied groups and to help shape and
influence broader ECB policies.
There have been setbacks, for instance Brexit comes to mind, given the
uncertainties it raised about working here but, ultimately, thanks to a dynamic
environment, motivated colleagues and continued prospects for development, it is
the triumphs that I recall the most.
ECB Annual Report 2023 103
Dimitrios Koukidis, Principal Vendor Management Specialist,
Directorate General Communications
I have strong memories of the build up to the ceremony to mark the inauguration of
the ECB in June 1998. I was one of a small team of organisers for this major event.
There was great enthusiasm and a sense of camaraderie among the team. This was
in the face of all the organisational challenges that go with setting up a new
institution that would quickly have to find its feet. For several years afterwards, I
enjoyed helping to organise both public and staff events at the ECB as the range and
scale of events continued to expand and evolve.
Fast forward to today: I now work in the Language Services Division, after taking up
an internal mobility opportunity in 2016. I look after budgeting, procurement and
vendor management tasks related to translation and editing, ensuring adequate
cover across the 24 official languages of the European Union. These support
functions play a crucial role in assisting the ECB to communicate clearly and
effectively to expert and non-expert audiences. As is the case across the ECB, we
continue to embed the latest technologies. For example, together with my
colleagues, I am applying artificial intelligence techniques to help enhance the
efficiency of our processes.
Reflecting on this long and exciting journey, I am proud to have done my part in
establishing the ECB as a world-class institution that keeps prices stable and the
financial system safe for around 350 million people in the euro area. I am also
grateful for having been empowered to grow professionally and personally
throughout my career at the ECB.
Francesco Mazzaferro, Director, European Systemic Risk Board
Secretariat
I can still picture myself as a junior officer, working in the “Changeover Committee”,
which – under the auspices of Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa – oversaw the transition of
markets from ten national currencies to the euro at midnight on 31 December 1998.
On that day, the culmination of everything I had contributed since starting at the
European Monetary Institute in mid-1995, I naively thought the work was done. I
feared that I risked getting trapped in routine after years of passion. But the following
decade I spent in the newly established Directorate General for European and
International Relations was to prove me wrong. Thanks to the wider interest in our
monetary integration, I was given the opportunity to set up innovative joint technical
assistance programmes by the Eurosystem for the benefit of central banks and
supervisors in the European Union neighbourhood.
Ten years later, when the ECB became host to the independent European Systemic
Risk Board (ESRB) in the wake of the financial crisis, I had the chance to try
something new. In early 2010 I was asked to be the project manager to establish the
ESRB. A year later I was appointed Head of the ESRB Secretariat. Since then I have
genuinely enjoyed every single day working to preserve the resilience of the financial
ECB Annual Report 2023 104
sector in a broad institutional setting alongside the central banks and supervisors at
European and national level as well as an exceptional group of colleagues from the
ECB and the ESRB member institutions.
Emily Witt, Head of Division, Directorate General Market
Operations
When I joined the European Monetary Institute in 1995, I was among the first
hundred colleagues tasked with the preparatory work for the introduction of the euro
as the single currency for Europe. In 1998 I quickly learned how the ECB works
together with the national central banks. I was thrilled to help coordinate the overall
testing and to see that the newly established systems worked well, whether
conducting monetary policy operations, executing payments or collecting statistics
across Europe.
Encouraged by the ECB’s objective to foster internal mobility, I worked in six different
business areas (Payments, IT, HR, Secretariat, Statistics and Markets). This allowed
me to increase my knowledge of core aspects of central banking and hone my skills
in project management, people management and leadership. I felt stimulated by the
exposure to diverse perspectives and thinking styles and was also able to build
lasting networks and friendships across Europe.
I am inspired by the ECB’s mission and proud to have contributed to the success of
change management initiatives for the benefit of Europe. One such example is the
roll-out of our document and records management system, which is key to sharing
and distributing information efficiently among colleagues in the national central banks
and safeguarding the ECB’s institutional memory.
I am now very happy to be responsible for the Financial Operations Services
Division. I like being close to the markets and enjoy the mixture of daily operations
and interesting projects that involves cooperating with many different ECB business
areas, central banks and external partners. Just recently, we established fiscal and
paying agency services for the European Commission.
In my free time, I love reading, cooking and hiking. I am an active member of the
ECB’s hiking club, which is a great opportunity to meet colleagues outside of work
and to get out into nature in different parts of Europe.
ECB Annual Report 2023 105
Annual accounts
Contents
Key figures 2
1 Management report 3
1.1 Purpose of the ECB’s management report 3
1.2 Main tasks and activities 3
1.3 Financial developments 7
1.4 Risk management 25
2 Financial statements of the ECB 31
2.1 Balance sheet as at 31 December 2023 31
2.2 Profit and loss account for the year ending 31 December 2023 33
2.3 Accounting policies 34
2.4 Notes on the balance sheet 44
2.5 Off-balance-sheet instruments 67
2.6 Notes on the profit and loss account 70
2.7 Post-balance-sheet events 78
2.8 Financial statements 2019-23 80
3 Independent auditor’s report 83
4 Note on profit distribution/allocation of losses 86
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Contents 1
Key figures
€674.5 billion €425.3 billion
ECB’s balance sheet Monetary policy securities
The ECB’s balance sheet decreased by €24.4 Securities held for monetary policy purposes
billion in 2023, mainly due to the maturing of decreased by €31.9 billion, as redemptions under
monetary policy securities. the APP were only partially reinvested between
March and June 2023 and such reinvestments
were completely discontinued as of July 2023.
€6,620 million €1,266 million
Full release of the provision for ECB’s loss for the year after the
financial risks release of the provision for financial
risks
The provision for financial risks was released in This loss will be carried forward on the ECB’s
full to partially offset losses incurred in 2023. The balance sheet to be offset against future profits.
ECB’s loss before the release of the The ECB's loss, which follows almost two decades
provision for financial risks stood at €7,886 million of substantial profits, reflects the role and
and mainly arose from the interest expense necessary policy actions of the Eurosystem in
resulting from the net TARGET liability. After this fulfilling its primary mandate of maintaining price
release, the loss for the year amounted to €1,266 stability and has no impact on its ability to conduct
million. effective monetary policy.
ECB’s balance sheet ECB’s profit/(loss) for the year
(EUR billions) (EUR millions)
-3.5%
800 4,000
700 680.1 698.9 674.5 3,000
2,366
600 569.3
2,000 1,643
500 457.1
1,000
400 192 0
0
300
-1,000
200
100 -2,000 (1,266)
0 -3,000
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Key figures 2
snoilliM
1 Management report
1.1 Purpose of the ECB’s management report
The management report1 is an integral part of the ECB’s Annual Accounts and is
designed to provide readers with contextual information related to the financial
statements.2 Given that the ECB’s activities and operations are undertaken in
support of its policy objectives, the ECB’s financial position and result should be
viewed in conjunction with its policy actions.
To this end, the management report presents the ECB’s main tasks and activities, as
well as their impact on its financial statements. Furthermore, it analyses the main
developments in the balance sheet and the profit and loss account during the year
and includes information on the ECB’s net equity. Finally, it describes the risk
environment in which the ECB operates, providing information on the specific risks to
which the ECB is exposed, and the risk management policies used to mitigate risks.
1.2 Main tasks and activities
The ECB is part of the Eurosystem, which comprises, besides the ECB, the national
central banks (NCBs) of the Member States of the European Union (EU) whose
currency is the euro.3 The Eurosystem has the primary objective of maintaining price
stability. The ECB performs its tasks as described in the Treaty on the Functioning of
the European Union4 and in the Statute of the European System of Central Banks
and of the European Central Bank (Statute of the ESCB)5 (Figure 1). The ECB
conducts its activities in order to fulfil its mandate and not with the intention of
generating profit.
1 Throughout this document, the numbers presented may not add up precisely to the totals and
percentages may not precisely reflect the absolute figures owing to rounding.
2 The “financial statements” comprise the balance sheet, the profit and loss account and the related
notes. The “Annual Accounts” comprise the financial statements, the management report, the
independent auditor’s report and the note on profit distribution/allocation of losses. Further details on
the related preparation and approval process can be found on the ECB’s website.
3 The number of NCBs in the Eurosystem in 2023 was 20.
4 Consolidated version of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (OJ C 202, 7.6.2016,
p.1), as amended. The unofficial consolidated text with the list of amendments can be found here.
5 Protocol (No 4) on the Statute of the European System of Central Banks and of the European Central
Bank (OJ C 202, 7.6.2016, p. 230). The European System of Central Banks (ESCB) comprises the
ECB and the NCBs of all 27 EU Member States.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 3
Figure 1
The ECB’s main tasks
Definition and implementation of the monetary policy
of the euro area
Conduct of foreign exchange operations
Holding and management of foreign reserves
Main
Main
activitie
tasks
s Promotion of the smooth operation of payment systems
Contribution to the safety and soundness of the banking system
and the stability of the financial system by carrying out effective
banking supervision
The Eurosystem’s monetary policy operations are recorded in the financial
statements of the ECB and of the euro area NCBs, reflecting the principle of
decentralised implementation of monetary policy in the Eurosystem. Table 1 below
provides an overview of the main operations and functions of the ECB in pursuit of
its mandate, and their impact on the ECB’s financial statements.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 4
Table 1
The ECB’s key activities and their impact on its financial statements
Implementation of monetary policy
Lending and liabilities to euro area
credit institutions related to monetary Securities held for monetary policy
policy operations purposes Securities lending
The monetary policy operational Purchases of these securities are Securities held for monetary policy
framework of the Eurosystem consists of a conducted by the ECB and the NCBs of purposes are available for lending by the
set of monetary policy instruments. The the Eurosystem and are recorded under Eurosystem.2 For the ECB, these
Eurosystem conducts open market the balance sheet item “Securities held for operations are conducted via specialised
operations, offers standing facilities and monetary policy purposes”. The securities institutions. These operations are
requires credit institutions to hold currently held are accounted for at recorded in the balance sheet items
minimum reserves.1 amortised cost subject to impairment. “Other liabilities to euro area credit
These monetary policy instruments are Coupon accruals and amortised premiums institutions denominated in euro” and
used in a decentralised manner by the and discounts are included in the profit “Liabilities to non-euro area residents
NCBs and are reflected in their financial and loss account on a net basis under denominated in euro” if collateral is
statements under the balance sheet items either “Other interest income” or “Other provided in the form of cash and this cash
“Lending to euro area credit institutions interest expense”, depending on whether remains uninvested. Otherwise, the
related to monetary policy operations the net amount is positive or negative. related securities lending operations are
denominated in euro” and “Liabilities to Realised gains and losses, if any, are recorded in off-balance-sheet accounts.
euro area credit institutions related to included in the profit and loss account Interest accruals are included in the ECB’s
monetary policy operations denominated under “Realised gains/losses arising from profit and loss account as “Other interest
in euro”. Accordingly, they have no impact financial operations”. income” or “Other interest expense”.
on the ECB’s financial statements.
Liquidity provision in foreign currency Liquidity provision to non-euro area central banks in euro
The ECB acts as an intermediary between non-euro area central The Eurosystem may provide euro liquidity to non-euro area
banks and the Eurosystem NCBs by means of swap transactions central banks by means of swap and repo transactions in
aimed at offering short-term foreign currency funding to exchange for eligible collateral.4
Eurosystem counterparties.3 For the ECB, the swap operations are recorded in the balance
These operations are recorded in the balance sheet items sheet items “Claims on non-euro area residents denominated in
“Liabilities to non-euro area residents denominated in euro” and foreign currency” and “Liabilities to non-euro area residents
“Other claims within the Eurosystem (net)” / “Other liabilities denominated in euro” or “Other claims within the Eurosystem
within the Eurosystem (net)”, as well as in off-balance-sheet (net)” / “Other liabilities within the Eurosystem (net)”, as well as
accounts. in off-balance-sheet accounts.
Interest accruals are included in the ECB’s profit and loss Interest accruals are included in the ECB’s profit and loss
account as “Other interest income” or “Other interest expense”. account as “Other interest income” or “Other interest expense”.
Conduct of foreign exchange operations and management of foreign reserves
Foreign exchange operations and management of foreign reserves
The ECB’s foreign reserves are presented on the balance sheet, mainly under “Gold and gold receivables”, “Claims on non-euro
area residents denominated in foreign currency” and “Claims on euro area residents denominated in foreign currency”, while any
related liabilities would be presented under “Liabilities to euro area residents denominated in foreign currency” and “Liabilities to
non-euro area residents denominated in foreign currency”. Foreign exchange transactions are reflected in off-balance-sheet
accounts until the settlement date.
Net interest income, including coupon accruals and amortised premiums and discounts, is included in the profit and loss account
under the item “Interest income on foreign reserve assets”.
Unrealised price and exchange rate losses exceeding previously recorded unrealised gains on the same items and realised gains
and losses arising from the sale of foreign reserves are also included in the profit and loss account under the items “Write-downs on
financial assets and positions” and “Realised gains/losses arising from financial operations” respectively. Unrealised gains are
recorded on the balance sheet under the item “Revaluation accounts”.
Promotion of the smooth operation of payment systems
Payment systems (TARGET)
Intra-Eurosystem balances of euro area NCBs vis-à-vis the ECB arising from TARGET5 are presented together on the balance sheet
of the ECB as a single net asset or liability position under “Other claims within the Eurosystem (net)” or “Other liabilities within the
Eurosystem (net)”. TARGET balances of non-euro area NCBs vis-à-vis the ECB are recorded on the balance sheet under “Liabilities
to non-euro area residents denominated in euro”. Balances of ancillary systems6 connected to TARGET through the TARGET-ECB
component are recorded on the balance sheet under “Liabilities to other euro area residents denominated in euro” or “Liabilities to
non-euro area residents denominated in euro”, depending on whether the managing entity is established in or outside the euro area.
Interest accruals are included in the profit and loss account under “Other interest income” or “Other interest expense”.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 5
Contribution to the safety and soundness of the banking system and the stability of the
financial system
Banking supervision – the Single Supervisory Mechanism
The annual expenses of the ECB in relation to its supervisory tasks are recovered via annual supervisory fees levied on the
supervised entities. The supervisory fees are included in the profit and loss account under the heading “Net income/expense from
fees and commissions”.
Furthermore, the ECB is entitled to impose administrative penalties on supervised entities for failure to comply with applicable EU
banking law on prudential requirements (including ECB supervisory decisions). The related income is recorded in the profit and loss
account under the heading “Net income/expense from fees and commissions”.
Other
Banknotes in circulation Own funds portfolio
The ECB has been allocated an 8% share of the total value of The own funds portfolio of the ECB is presented on the balance
euro banknotes in circulation. This share is backed by claims on sheet, mainly under the item “Other financial assets”.
the NCBs, which bear interest at the rate used by the Coupon accruals and amortised premiums and discounts are
Eurosystem in its tenders for main refinancing operations and included in the profit and loss account under “Other interest
are recorded on the balance sheet under the item “Claims income” and “Other interest expense”.
related to the allocation of euro banknotes within the
Eurosystem”. The interest is included in the profit and loss Unrealised price losses exceeding previously recorded
account under the item “Interest income arising from the unrealised price gains on the same items and realised gains and
allocation of euro banknotes within the Eurosystem”. losses arising from the sale of securities are also included in the
profit and loss account under the items “Write-downs on financial
Expenses arising from the cross-border transportation of euro assets and positions” and “Realised gains/losses arising from
banknotes between banknote printing works and NCBs, for the financial operations” respectively. Unrealised price gains are
delivery of new banknotes, and between NCBs, for the recorded on the balance sheet under the item “Revaluation
compensation of shortages with surplus stocks, are borne accounts”.
centrally by the ECB. These expenses are presented in the profit
and loss account under the heading “Banknote production
services”.
1) Further details on the Eurosystem’s monetary policy instruments and, more specifically, on the open market operations can be
found on the ECB’s website.
2) Further details on securities lending can be found on the ECB’s website.
3) Further details on the currency swap lines can be found on the ECB’s website.
4) Further details on the Eurosystem’s euro liquidity operations against eligible collateral can be found on the ECB’s website.
5) Further details on TARGET can be found on the ECB’s website.
6) Ancillary systems are financial market infrastructures that have been granted access to the TARGET-ECB component by the
Governing Council, provided they fulfil the requirements defined in Decision (EU) 2022/911 of the ECB of 19 April 2022 concerning the
terms and conditions of TARGET-ECB and repealing Decision ECB/2007/7 (ECB/2022/22) (OJ L 163, 17.6.2022, p. 1), as amended.
The unofficial consolidated text with the list of amendments can be found here. Further details on ancillary systems can be found on
the ECB’s website.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 6
1.3 Financial developments
1.3.1 Balance sheet
The ECB’s balance sheet expanded significantly in the period from 2019 to 2022,
mainly owing to outright purchases of securities by the ECB in the context of the
implementation of the monetary policy of the Eurosystem (Chart 1). In particular, the
main drivers of the substantial expansion in 2020 and 2021 were net purchases of
securities under the asset purchase programme (APP)6 and the launch of the
pandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP)7 in March 2020. Net purchases
of securities under the PEPP and the APP were discontinued as of the end of March
2022 and 1 July 2022 respectively, leading to a more moderate increase in the
ECB’s balance sheet in 2022.
Chart 1
Main components of the ECB’s balance sheet
(EUR billions)
Foreign reserve assets Banknotes in circulation
Securities held for monetary policy purposes Intra-Eurosystem liabilities
Intra-Eurosystem claims Other liabilities
Other assets and loss forthe year Provision for financial risks, revaluation accounts,
capitaland profit for the year
-3.5%
800
680.1 698.9 674.5
700
569.3 80.3 84.5 87.7
600
500 457.1 75.8
400 75.8 445.4 457.3 425.3
300 349.0
250.4
200
Assets: 100 103.4 114.8 123.6 125.8 125.4
0 27.5 29.7 30.9 31.4 36.0
Liabilities: 103.4 114.8 123.6 125.8 125.4
100
200
274.6
300 378.4 375.1 355.5
445.0
400 32.0
47.0
500 31.0
45.1 132.5 165.7
600 58.0
700 48.9 51.9 46.0
800
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Source: ECB.
6 The APP consists of the third covered bond purchase programme (CBPP3), the asset-backed
securities purchase programme (ABSPP), the public sector purchase programme (PSPP) and the
corporate sector purchase programme (CSPP). The ECB does not acquire securities under the CSPP.
Further details on the APP can be found on the ECB’s website.
7 Further details on the PEPP can be found on the ECB’s website.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 7
€24.4 billion In 2023 the ECB’s balance sheet decreased by €24.4 billion to €674.5 billion,
Decrease in the ECB’s mainly owing to the gradual decline of APP holdings as a result of the only partial
balance sheet
reinvestment of principal payments from maturing securities in this portfolio between
March and June 2023 and the complete discontinuation of such reinvestments as of
July 2023.
Euro-denominated securities held for monetary policy purposes made up 63%
63%
Share of securities held of the ECB’s total assets at the end of 2023. Under this balance sheet item, the ECB
for monetary policy
holds securities acquired in the context of the Securities Markets Programme (SMP),
purposes in total assets
the CBPP3, the ABSPP, the PSPP and the PEPP. The securities purchased under
these programmes are valued on an amortised cost basis subject to impairment.
Based on the relevant Governing Council decisions, the Eurosystem continued
€31.9 billion
Decrease in securities reinvesting, in full, the principal payments from maturing securities under the PEPP
held for monetary policy
purposes throughout the year, and under the APP until the end of February 2023. From the
beginning of March until the end of June 2023, the Eurosystem reinvested only
partially the principal payments from maturing securities under the APP and as of
July 2023 discontinued these reinvestments. As a result of these decisions, the
portfolio of securities held by the ECB for monetary policy purposes decreased by
€31.9 billion to €425.3 billion (Chart 2) with the PSPP, ABSPP and CBPP3 holdings
under the APP decreasing by €18.0 billion, €9.5 billion and €1.6 billion respectively,
driven by redemptions. The PEPP portfolio decreased by €2.6 billion, mainly owing
to the net impact of the amortisation of premiums and discounts8 on securities held in
the portfolio.
The Governing Council intends9 to continue to reinvest, in full, the principal payments
from maturing securities purchased under the PEPP during the first half of 2024. It
then intends to reduce the PEPP portfolio at Eurosystem level by €7.5 billion per
month on average over the second half of the year and to discontinue reinvestments
at the end of 2024. The Governing Council will continue applying flexibility in
reinvesting redemptions coming due in the PEPP portfolio, with a view to countering
risks to the monetary policy transmission mechanism related to the pandemic.
8 Amortisation arises from the accounting principle that requires securities to be revalued upwards or
downwards over time towards their maturity date depending on whether they have been purchased at
prices below or above their face value.
9 For further details, see the press release of 14 December 2023 on the Governing Council’s decisions.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 8
Chart 2
Securities held for monetary policy purposes
(EUR billions)
Source: ECB.
For the active programmes of securities held for monetary policy purposes, namely
the APP and the PEPP, securities held by the ECB at the end of 2023 had a
diversified maturity profile10 (Chart 3).
Chart 3
Maturity profile of the APP and the PEPP
Source: ECB.
Note: For asset-backed securities, the maturity profile is based on the weighted average life of the securities rather than the legal
maturity date.
In 2023 the total euro equivalent value of the ECB’s foreign reserve assets, which
consist of gold, special drawing rights, US dollars, Japanese yen and Chinese
renminbi, increased by €3.3 billion to €87.7 billion.
10 More information about maturity restrictions for both the APP and the PEPP can be found on the ECB’s
website.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 9
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
0 0
5 0
0 0
5 0
0 0
5 0
0 0
5 0
0 0
5 0
0
A P P
2
T o ta
C B P
S M P
C B P
2 3 .7 %
2 .0 %
lP
P
1 a n d C
3
2 5 0 .4
1 9 6 .3
2 8 .4
2 1 .7
2 0 1 9
B P P
1
2
4 .4 %
3 9 .9 %
3 4 9 .0
7 3 .0
2 2 0 .0
2 9 .4
2 4 .0
2 0 2 0
P E
A B S P
P S P P
P E P P
P P
3 0 .1 %
P
4 4 5 .4
1 5 6 .7
2 3 4 .1
2 8 .4
2 4 .9
2 0 2 1
2 5 .1 %
1 2 .0 %
3
4 5 7 .3
1 6 5 .7
2 4 2 .9
2 2 .9
2 5 .1
2 0 2 2
2 .8 %
- 7 .0 %
4 2 5 .3
1 6 3 .1
2 2 4 .9
1 3 .3
2 3 .5
2 0 2 3
< O n e ye a r
B e tw e e n o n e a n d five ye a rs
B e tw e e n five a n d te n ye a rs
> T e n ye a rs
The euro equivalent value of the ECB’s holdings of gold and gold receivables
increased by €2.7 billion to €30.4 billion in 2023 (Chart 4) owing, primarily, to an
increase in the market price of gold in euro terms. This increase also led to an
equivalent rise in the ECB’s gold revaluation accounts (see Section 1.3.2 “Net
equity”). In addition, upon the adoption of the single currency by Croatia with effect
from 1 January 2023, Hrvatska narodna banka transferred to the ECB gold with a
value of €96 million.
Chart 4
Gold holdings and gold prices
(left-hand scale: EUR billions; right-hand scale: euro per fine ounce of gold)
Source: ECB.
Note: “Gold revaluation accounts” does not include the contributions of the central banks of the Members States that joined the euro
area after 1 January 1999 to the accumulated gold revaluation accounts of the ECB as at the day prior to their entry into the
Eurosystem.
The ECB’s foreign currency holdings11 of US dollars, Japanese yen and Chinese
renminbi increased in euro terms by €0.2 billion to €55.2 billion (Chart 5), mainly
owing to the income earned during the year, primarily on the US dollar portfolio. In
addition, upon the adoption of the single currency by Croatia with effect from 1
January 2023, Hrvatska narodna banka transferred to the ECB foreign reserve
assets denominated in US dollars with a value of €544 million. The increase in the
total value of foreign currency holdings was partially offset, mainly by the
depreciation of the US dollar and the Japanese yen against the euro.
11 These holdings comprise assets included under the balance sheet items “Claims on non-euro area
residents denominated in foreign currency – Balances with banks and security investments, external
loans and other external assets” and “Claims on euro area residents denominated in foreign currency”.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 10
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
0
5
0
5
0
5
0
5
0
GGC ooo ld p ric e (rig h t-h a n
ld re v a lu a tio n a c c
s t o f h o ld in g s
1 ,3 5 4
2 2 .0
1 7 .8
4 .2
2 0 1 9
do sca le )
u n ts
1 ,5 4 4
2 5 .1
2 0 .9
4 .2
2 0 2 0
1 ,6 0 9
2 6 .1
2 2 .0
4 .2
2 0 2 1
1 ,7 0 6
2 7 .7
2 3 .5
4 .2
2 0 2 2
1 ,8 6 8
3 0 .4
2 6 .2
4 .2
2 0 2 3
2
1
1
1
1
7
5
2
0
,0 0
,7 5
,5 0
,2 5
,0 0
5 0
0 0
5 0
0
0
0
0
0
The value of the ECB’s
holdings of gold and gold
receivables increased
owing, primarily, to the
increase in the market
price of gold in euro
terms
Increase in the ECB’s
foreign currency
holdings, mainly owing
to the income earned on
the US dollar portfolio
Chart 5
Foreign currency holdings
(EUR billions)
Source: ECB.
The US dollar is the main component of the ECB’s foreign currency holdings,
accounting for 81% of the total at the end of 2023.
The ECB manages the investment of its foreign currency holdings using a three-step
approach. First, a strategic benchmark portfolio is designed by the ECB’s risk
managers and approved by the Governing Council. Second, the ECB’s portfolio
managers design the tactical benchmark portfolio, which is approved by the
Executive Board. Third, investment operations are conducted in a decentralised
manner by the NCBs on a day-to-day basis.
The ECB’s foreign currency holdings are mainly invested in securities and money
market deposits or are held in current accounts (Chart 6). Securities in this portfolio
are valued at year-end market prices.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 11
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
T o ta l
U S D
JP Y
C N Y
€ 5 3 .1
€ 4 0 .7 $ 4 5 .7
€ 1 1 .9
¥ 1 ,4 5 5 .4
2 0 1 9
¥
€ 5 0 .1
€ 3 7 .9 $ 4 6 .5
€ 1 1 .7
1 ,4 7 6 .0
2 0 2 0
¥
€ 5 3 .0
€ 4 0 .9 $ 4 6 .4
€ 1 1 .4
1 ,4 9 1 .7
2 0 2 1
¥
€ 5 5 .0
€ 4 3 .1 $ 4 6 .0
€ 1 1 .3
1 ,5 8 7 .7
2 0 2 2
+ 0 .4 %
¥
€ 5 5 .2
€ 4 4 .8 $ 4 9 .5
€ 9 .9
1 ,5 4 7 .2
2 0 2 3
Chart 6
Composition of foreign currency investments
(EUR billions)
Source: ECB.
The purpose of the ECB’s foreign currency holdings is to finance potential
interventions in the foreign exchange market. For this reason, the ECB’s foreign
currency holdings are managed in accordance with three objectives (in order of
priority): liquidity, safety and return. Therefore, this portfolio mainly comprises
securities with short maturities (Chart 7).
Chart 7
Maturity profile of foreign currency-denominated securities
Source: ECB.
The value of the own funds portfolio increased by €1.0 billion to €22.1 billion
(Chart 8), primarily owing to (i) the reinvestment of interest income generated on this
portfolio and (ii) the increase in the market value of euro-denominated securities held
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 12
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
TSCMR o ta l
e cu rity in ve stm e n ts
u rre n t a cco u n ts
o n e y m a rke t d e p o sits
e ve rse re p u rch a se a g re e m
5 3 .1
4 1 .6
7 .0
2 .8 1 .8
2 0 1 9
e n
2
ts
5 0 .1
3 5 .8
6 .9
3 .4
4 .0
2 0 2 0
1 .5 %
7 .2 %
1 .4 %
5 3 .0
3 6 .8
1 2 .9
2 .8
2 0 2 1
6 9 .8 %
+ 0 .4 %
5 5 .2 5 5 .0
3 7 .2
4 6 .2
1 5 .7
7 .2
2 .1 1 .9
2 0 2 2 2 0 2 3
< O n e ye a r
B e tw e e n o n e a n d five ye a rs
B e tw e e n five a n d te n ye a rs
> T e n ye a rs
70%
Foreign currency-
denominated securities
with a maturity of less
than one year
in this portfolio as a result of the decline in euro area bond yields at the year-end
(Chart 17).
The portfolio mainly consists of euro-denominated securities which are valued at
year-end market prices. In 2023 government debt securities accounted for 77% of
the total portfolio.
The share of green investments in the own funds portfolio continued to increase,
20%
Share of sustainable and rising from 13% at the end of 2022 to 20% at the end of 2023. The ECB plans to
responsible investments
inthe ECB’s own funds further increase this share over the coming years.12 Since 2021 purchases of green
portfolio
bonds in secondary markets are complemented by investments in the euro-
denominated green bond investment fund for central banks launched by the Bank for
International Settlements in January 2021.
Chart 8
The ECB’s own funds portfolio
(EUR billions)
Total
Government bonds
Government bills
Covered bonds
Supranational, agency and other securities
Other financial assets (net) + 4.5%
25
22.1
20.6 20.7 21.1 21.1
20
8.2 8.6 8.5 8.1 9.1
15
10
6.3 6.6 6.6 8.0 8.0
5 2.8 2.1 1.5 1.0 0.9
2.3 2.2 2.4
2.2 2.2
0 1.2 1.2 2.1 1.9 1.7
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Source: ECB.
The ECB’s own funds portfolio predominantly consists of investments of its paid-up
capital and amounts set aside in the general reserve fund and in the provision for
financial risks. The purpose of this portfolio is to provide income to help fund those
ECB operating expenses that are not related to the delivery of its supervisory
tasks.13 It is invested in euro-denominated assets, subject to the limits imposed by its
risk control framework. This results in a more diversified maturity structure (Chart 9)
than in the foreign reserves portfolio.
12 In accordance with the recommendations of the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures,
the ECB published its first climate-related financial disclosures with regard to its own funds and pension
portfolios on the ECB’s website in March 2023 and announced that it will disclose climate-related
information on these portfolios every year.
13 The expenses incurred by the ECB in the performance of its supervisory tasks are recovered via
annual fees levied on supervised entities. Further details can be found on the ECB’s banking
supervision website.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 13
Chart 9
Maturity profile of the ECB’s own funds securities
Source: ECB.
At the end of 2023 the total value of euro banknotes in circulation was €1,567.7
billion, virtually the same as at the end of 2022. The ECB has been allocated an 8%
share of the total value of euro banknotes in circulation, which amounted to €125.4
billion at the end of the year. Since the ECB does not issue banknotes itself, it holds
intra-Eurosystem claims vis-à-vis the euro area NCBs for a value equivalent to the
value of the banknotes in circulation allocated to it.
The ECB’s intra-Eurosystem liabilities, which mainly comprise the net TARGET
balance of euro area NCBs vis-à-vis the ECB and the ECB’s liabilities with regard to
the foreign reserve assets transferred to it by the euro area NCBs when they joined
the Eurosystem, increased by €89.6 billion to €445.0 billion in 2023.
The development of the intra-Eurosystem liabilities is mainly driven by the evolution
of the net TARGET liability. The main factors contributing to the changes in the net
TARGET liability during the period 2019-2023 were purchases and redemptions of
monetary policy securities, which are settled via TARGET accounts, and changes in
liabilities to euro area and non-euro area residents denominated in euro (Chart 10).
In 2023 the cash inflows from redemptions of monetary policy securities were lower
than the cash outflows related to the decrease in liabilities to euro area and non-euro
area residents denominated in euro, leading to an overall increase in the net
TARGET liability.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 14
3 2 .6 %
1 2 .2 %
3 .7 %
5 1 .5 %
<
B
B
>
O n e ye a r
e tw e e n o n e a n d five y e a rs
e tw e e n five a n d te n ye a rs
T e n y e a rs
Chart 10
Net intra-Eurosystem TARGET balance, liabilities to euro area and non-euro area
residents denominated in euro and securities held for monetary policy purposes
(EUR billions)
Source: ECB.
Note: For the purpose of this chart, “Liabilities to euro area and non-euro area residents denominated in euro” consists of “Other
liabilities to euro area credit institutions denominated in euro”, “Liabilities to other euro area residents denominated in euro” and
“Liabilities to non-euro area residents denominated in euro”.
In 2023 the ECB’s other liabilities fell by €107.7 billion to €58.0 billion owing to the
decrease in liabilities to euro area and non-euro area residents denominated in euro.
Specifically, there were reductions in (i) deposits accepted by the ECB in its role as
fiscal agent14, (ii) balances of non-euro area ancillary systems connected to
TARGET through the TARGET-ECB component and (iii) cash received as collateral
against the lending of PSPP and public sector PEPP securities.
1.3.2 Net equity
The ECB’s net equity consists of its capital, any amounts held in the provision for
financial risks and the general reserve fund, the revaluation accounts15, any
accumulated losses from previous years and any profit/loss for the year.16
At the end of 2023 the ECB’s net equity totalled €44.5 billion (Chart 11), which was
€7.0 billion lower than at the end of 2022 owing to the losses incurred during 2023.
The provision for financial risks was fully used to cover part of these losses, reducing
the loss for the year to €1.3 billion. The decrease in the ECB’s net equity arising from
the 2023 losses was partially offset by (i) the increase in the revaluation accounts,
mainly as a result of the rise in the market price of gold in euro terms in 2023, and (ii)
the contributions from Hrvatska narodna banka to the paid-up capital, the revaluation
14 In accordance with Article 21 of the Statute of the ESCB, the ECB may act as fiscal agent for Union
institutions, bodies, offices or agencies, central governments, regional, local or other public authorities,
other bodies governed by public law, or public undertakings of Member States.
15 In this section, “Revaluation accounts” includes total revaluation gains on gold, foreign currency and
securities holdings, but excludes the revaluation account for post-employment benefits.
16 This definition is solely used for the purpose of preparing the ECB’s Annual Accounts.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 15
5
4
3
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
SNL e cu ritie s h e ld fo r m o n e ta ry p o licy p u rp o se s (a sse t sid e )
e t in tra -E u ro syste m T A R G E T b a la n ce (lia b ility sid e )
ia b ilitie s to e u ro a re a a n d n o n -e u ro a re a re sid e n ts d e n o m
2 0 1 9 2 0 2 0 2
in a te
0 2 1
d in e u ro (lia b ility sid e )
2 0 2 2 2 0 2 3
€44.5 billion
The ECB’s net equity
accounts and the provision for financial risks following the adoption of the single
currency by Croatia with effect from 1 January 2023.
Chart 11
The ECB’s net equity
(EUR billions)
Source: ECB.
Note: “Revaluation accounts” includes total revaluation gains on gold, foreign currency and securities holdings, but excludes the
revaluation account for post-employment benefits.
Changes in the ECB’s net equity during the year are presented in Table 2.
Table 2
Changes in the ECB’s net equity
(EUR millions)
Provision for Revaluation Profit/(loss) Total net
Capital financial risks accounts for the year equity
Balance as at 31 December 2022 8,880 6,566 36,118 - 51,564
Payment of the remainder of the capital
subscription by Hrvatska narodna banka 69 69
Contribution to the provision for financial
risks by Hrvatska narodna banka 53 53
Revaluation accounts 743
Gold 2,634
Foreign currency (2,562)
Securities and other instruments 378
Contribution to the revaluation accounts by
Hrvatska narodna banka1 293
Release from provision for financial risks (6,620) (6,620)
Loss for the year (1,266) (1,266)
Balance as at 31 December 2023 8,948 - 36,861 (1,266) 44,543
1) Upon the adoption of the single currency by Croatia, Hrvatska narodna banka contributed to the balances of all the revaluation
accounts of the ECB as at 31 December 2022. The figure in this table excludes the contribution to the revaluation account for post-
employment benefits, in line with the definition of “Revaluation accounts” in this section.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 16
6
5
4
3
2
1
-1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
TRPCP o ta l
e v a lu a tio n a c c o u n ts
ro visio n fo r fin a n cia l risks
a p ita l
ro fit/(lo ss) fo r th e ye a r
4 7 .7
3 0 .2
7 .5
7 .7
2 .4
2 0 1 9
4 6 .2
2 9 .3
7 .6
7 .7
1 .6
2 0 2 0
4 9 .7
3 3 .1
8 .2
8 .3
0 .2
2 0 2 1
5 1 .6
3 6 .1
6 .6
8 .9
2 0 2 2
- 1 3 .6 %
4 4 .5
3 6 .9
8 .9
(1 .3 )
2 0 2 3
Unrealised gains on gold and foreign currencies and unrealised gains on securities
that are subject to price revaluation are not recognised as income in the profit and
loss account but are recorded directly in revaluation accounts shown on the liability
side of the ECB’s balance sheet. The balances in these accounts can be used to
absorb the impact of any future unfavourable movement in the respective prices
and/or exchange rates and thus strengthen the ECB’s resilience against the
underlying risks. In 2023 the revaluation accounts for gold, foreign currencies and
securities increased by €0.7 billion to €36.9 billion, mainly owing to higher
revaluation balances for gold as a result of the rise in the market price of gold in euro
terms. The revaluation balances for foreign currencies decreased, mainly owing to
the depreciation of the US dollar and the Japanese yen against the euro (Chart 12).
Chart 12
The main foreign exchange rates and gold price over the period 2019-23
(percentage changes vis-à-vis 2019; year-end data)
Source: ECB.
In view of its exposure to financial risks (see Section 1.4.1 “Financial risks”), the ECB
may set aside a provision for financial risks to be used to the extent deemed
necessary by the Governing Council to offset losses that arise as a result of this
exposure. The size of this provision is reviewed annually, taking a range of factors
into account, including the level of holdings of risk-bearing assets, the projected
results for the coming year and a risk assessment. The provision for financial risks,
together with any amount held in the ECB’s general reserve fund, may not exceed
the value of the capital paid up by the euro area NCBs. At the end of 2022 this
provision amounted to €6,566 million. Upon the adoption of the single currency by
Croatia, Hrvatska narodna banka contributed €53 million to the provision for financial
risks with effect from 1 January 2023, increasing its size to €6,620 million. At the end
of 2023, following the annual review, the Governing Council decided to release this
provision in full to partially offset losses incurred in 2023. The Governing Council
may decide to replenish the provision for financial risks, in the context of its annual
review, once the ECB returns to making a profit.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 17
4
3
2
1
-1
-2
-3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
02
0 1 9
EEEE uuuu rorororo p
p
p
p
eeee r fin e o u n ce o f g o ld
r U S d o lla r
r J a p a n e s e y e n
r C h in e se re n m in b i
2 0 2 0 2 0 2 1 2 0 2 2 2 0 2 3
3%
Depreciation of the US
dollar against the euro
€6,620 million
Full release of the
provision for financial
risks
The ECB’s loss for the year, after the release of the provision for financial risks,
was €1.3 billion (see Section 1.3.3 “Profit and loss account”). The Governing Council
decided to carry forward this loss on the ECB’s balance sheet to be offset against
future profits.
1.3.3 Profit and loss account
The ECB’s result has gradually fallen since 2019 (Chart 13). In 2020 and 2021 this
decrease was mainly driven by lower income generated on foreign reserve assets
and on securities held for monetary policy purposes. In 2022 and 2023 the reduction
in the ECB’s result was primarily due to the materialisation of interest rate risk, as the
rise in interest rates in the euro area led to an immediate increase in the interest
expense paid by the ECB on its net TARGET liability, while the income earned on
the ECB’s assets did not increase to the same extent or at the same pace (see
Section 1.4.1 “Financial risks”).
Profits or losses are side The ECB’s loss for 2023, which followed a long period of substantial profits, reflects
effects of the ECB’s
the role and necessary policy actions of the Eurosystem in fulfilling its primary
primary goal of price
stability mandate of maintaining price stability and has no impact on its ability to conduct
effective monetary policy. In the previous years the ECB’s balance sheet expanded
significantly, mainly driven by the purchase of securities under the asset purchase
programmes. On the asset side, most monetary policy securities currently held were
purchased during a period of low interest rates and have long maturities and fixed
coupons. These will continue to generate relatively low interest income, not
immediately affected by changes in key ECB interest rates. At the same time, the
cash settlement of these purchases via TARGET led to a rise in the ECB’s net
TARGET liability, which is remunerated at the rate on the main refinancing
operations (MRO rate). In order to combat inflation in the euro area, this rate began
to be raised in 2022, resulting in an immediate increase in the ECB’s interest
expense.
Materialisationof interest The ECB is likely to incur further losses over the next few years as a result of the
rate risk expected to
materialisation of interest rate risk, before returning to making sustained profits. The
lead to further losses
over the nextfew years occurrence and magnitude of these losses are uncertain and will largely depend on
the future evolution of key ECB interest rates and the size and composition of the
ECB’s balance sheet. However, the ECB’s capital and its substantial revaluation
accounts, which together amounted to €45.8 billion at the end of 2023 (see
Section 1.3.2 “Net equity”), underline its financial strength, and, in any case, the ECB
can operate effectively and fulfil its primary mandate of maintaining price stability
regardless of any losses.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 18
Chart 13
Main components of the ECB’s profit and loss account
(EUR millions)
Source: ECB.
Note: “Other income and expenses” consists of “Net income/expense from fees and commissions”, “Income from equity shares and
participating interests”, “Other income” and “Other expenses”.
In 2023 the ECB used the full amount of €6,620 million set aside in the provision for
financial risks to partially offset losses incurred during the year. After the release of
this provision, the ECB’s loss stood at €1,266 million (2022: zero). The main driver
of this loss was the significant net interest expense (Chart 14).
Chart 14
Drivers of the ECB’s result for 2022 and 2023
(EUR millions)
Source: ECB.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 19
8
6
4
2
-2
-4
-6
-8
-1 0
,0
,0
,0
,0
,0
,0
,0
,0
,0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
PNNTOO ro fit/(lo ss) fo r th e ye a r
e t in te re s t in c o m e /(e xp e n s e )
e t re s u lt o f fin a n c ia l o p e ra tio n s a n d w
ra n sfe r (to )/fro m th e p ro visio n fo r fin a
th e r in co m e a n d e xp e n se s
p e ra tin g e xp e n s e s
8 4
2 ,3 6 6
1 ,6 4 3
2 ,6 8 6 2 ,0 1 7 1 7 6 3 1 6 5 7 5 5 5 7 (1 ,1 5 6 ) (1 ,1 9 9 )
(4 8 )
2 0 1 9 2 0 2 0
rite -d o w n s
n cia l risks
6 1
1 ,5 6 6
1 9 2 2 (1 3 (1 ,2 3 8 )
(6 1 0 )
2 0 2 1
9 )
1 ,6 2 7
9 0 0 6 4 7 0 (1 ,9 5 0 )
(1 ,2 2 4 )
2 0 2 2
6 ,6 2 0
7 2 3 (1 4 4 )
(1 ,2 6 6 )
(7 ,1 9 3 )
(1 ,2 7 2 )
2 0 2 3
€1,266 million
ECB’s loss after the
release of the provision
for financial risks
2022 2022
2023 2023
900
Net interest income/(expense)
(7,193)
Net result of financial operations (1,950)
and write-downs (144)
647
Other income and expenses
723
(1,224)
Operating expenses
(1,272)
Result before transfer (to)/from (1,627)
the provision for financial risks (7,886)
Transfer (to)/from 1,627
the provision for financial risks 6,620
Result after transfer (to)/from 0
the provision for financial risks (1,266)
-8,000 -6,000 -4,000 -2,000 0 2,000 4,000 6,000 8,000
The ECB’s net interest expense amounted to €7,193 million in 2023, compared to
net interest income of €900 million in 2022 (Chart 15). This was mainly due to the
interest expense arising from the ECB’s net TARGET liability. The net other interest
expense and the interest expense related to the remuneration of euro area NCBs’
claims in respect of foreign reserves transferred to the ECB also contributed to this
decrease. These expenses were partially offset by higher interest income arising
from (i) the ECB’s claims related to the allocation of euro banknotes within the
Eurosystem, (ii) securities held for monetary policy purposes and (iii) foreign reserve
assets.
Chart 15
Net interest income/(expense)
(EUR millions)
Source: ECB.
Net interest income generated on securities held for monetary policy purposes
increased by €1,933 million to €3,467 million in 2023 (Chart 16) owing to higher net
interest income from securities held under the APP (under the CBPP3, ABSPP and
PSPP) and the PEPP. Net interest income from the APP holdings rose by
€1,247 million to €2,818 million in 2023, while the PEPP portfolio generated net
interest income of €600 million in 2023, compared to a net interest expense of
€103 million the year before. These developments were mainly driven by the
significant increase in euro area interest rates and bond yields which began in 2022
(Chart 17) and which (i) allowed reinvestments under the APP and the PEPP at
higher yields than the historical yields of the respective portfolios and (ii) had a
positive impact on the coupon on securities with variable interest rates (mainly held
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 20
4
3
2
1
-1
-2
-3
,0
,0
,0
,0
,0
,0
,0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
N e t in te re st in co m e /(e xp e n se )
N e t in te re st in co m e o n m o n e ta ry p o licy se cu ritie s
N e t in te re st in co m e o n fo re ig n re se rve a sse ts
In te re st in co m e a risin g fro m th e a llo ca tio n o f e u ro b a n kn o te s
N e t o th e r in te re s t in c o m e /(e xp e n s e )
R e m u n e ra tio n o f N C B s' cla im s in re sp e ct o f fo re ig n re se rve s tra n sfe rre d
N e t in te re st in co m e /(e xp e n se ) a risin g fro m T A R G E T b a la n ce s d u e to /fro m N
2 ,6 8 6
1 ,5 3 4 2 ,0 1 7
1 ,5 6 6 1 ,4 4 7
7 9 8
1 ,3 3 7
9 0 0 1 ,0 0 6
1 ,0 5 2
7 3 6 1 9 7 4 7 4
3 4 2 1 7 9 1 6 7 1 0 8
(2 0 1 )
(2 ,0 7 5 )
2 0 1 9 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 1 2 0 2 2
C B s
1 2
8
4
-4
-8
-1 2
-1 6
-2 0
,0
,0
,0
,0
,0
,0
,0
,0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3 ,4 6 7
2 ,3 8 2
4 ,8 1 7
(1 ,3 3 5 )
(1 4 ,2 3 6 )
(2 ,2 8 8 )
2 0 2 3
(7 ,1 9 3 )
Net interest expense
mainly resulted from the
ECB’s net TARGET
liability
Higher interest income,
mainly on securities held
under the ABSPP and
on public sector
securities in the APP
and PEPP
under the ABSPP). Lower premium amortisation, particularly on public sector
securities acquired in the past, also contributed to the increase. Net interest income
on the SMP decreased by €16 million to €49 million owing to the decline in the size
of the portfolio as a result of maturing securities.
Chart 16
Net interest income/(expense) on securities held for monetary policy purposes
(EUR millions)
Total ABSPP
CBPP1and CBPP2 PSPP
SMP PEPP
CBPP3 + 126.0%
4,000
3,467
3,500
600
3,000
2,500
2,000
1,447 1,534 1,997
1,500 1,337 1,006
1,000 985 1,036 1,310
1,029
50 0 0 1 2 3 2 9 1 1 1 ( 1 1 4 3 1 8 1 1 8 3 ) ( 1 1 2 0 0 5 7 3 2) (1 1 1 0 4 2 0 0 3) 6 1 4 7 2 9
-500
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Source: ECB.
Chart 17
Seven-year sovereign bond yields in the euro area
(percentages per annum; month-end data)
Source: ECB.
Net interest income on foreign reserve assets increased by €1,583 million to
€2,382 million, predominantly as a result of higher interest income from securities
denominated in US dollars. The average interest rate earned on the ECB’s US dollar
portfolio increased in 2023 compared to the previous year owing to (i) sales and
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 21
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
.0
.0
.0
.0
.0
.0
.0
2 0 1 9
E u ro a re a
Ita ly
F ra n ce
S p a in
G e rm a n y
2 0 2 0 2 0 2 1 2 0 2 2 2 0 2 3
Increase in interest
income on the US dollar
portfolio
redemptions of lower-yield bonds purchased in the past and (ii) purchases of
securities with higher yields following the increase in US dollar bond yields since the
end of 2021 (Chart 18).
Chart 18
Two-year sovereign bond yields in the United States, Japan and China
(percentages per annum; month-end data)
Source: LSEG.
Interest income arising from the allocation of euro banknotes to the ECB and
interest expense stemming from the remuneration of NCBs’ claims in respect
of foreign reserves transferred increased by €4,081 million to €4,817 million and
by €1,133 million to €1,335 million respectively in 2023. The changes were the result
of increases in the MRO rate, which is the rate used for the calculation of interest on
these balances. The MRO rate reached 4.5% at the end of 2023, while the annual
average rate increased from 0.6% in 2022 to 3.8% in 2023.
The net interest expense arising from TARGET balances due to/from NCBs
increased by €12,161 million to €14,236 million in 2023. The increase was mainly
driven by the higher average MRO rate in 2023, which is used for the remuneration
of the ECB’s intra-Eurosystem TARGET balances.
The net other interest expense of €2,288 million in 2023 compares with net other
interest income of €108 million in the previous year. This change was mainly due to
the remuneration of deposits accepted by the ECB in its role as fiscal agent and the
remuneration of balances of euro area ancillary systems. In the second half of 2022,
once the applicable remuneration rates turned positive, the ECB started to pay
interest on these items. In 2023 the remuneration rates and average balance of
these items rose further, leading to an increase in the interest expense. This interest
expense was partially offset by the higher interest income earned on the own funds
portfolio as a result of rising yields in the euro area (Chart 17).
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 22
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
.0
.0
.0
.0
.0
.0
.0
.0
2 0 1 9
U n ite d
Ja p a n
C h in a
S ta te s
2 0 2 0 2 0 2 1 2 0 2 2 2 0 2 3
3.8%
Average MRO rate in
2023; gradual increase
during the year from
2.5% to 4.5% at year-
end
€14,236 million
Interest expense
resulting from the ECB’s
net TARGET liability,
mainly drivenbythe
gradual increasein the
MRO rate
Net realised losses arising from financial operations decreased by €4 million to
€106 million in 2023 (Chart 19). These losses mainly resulted from (i) outstanding
premiums on securities held in the ABSPP that were repaid before maturity and (ii)
net realised price losses on sales of US dollar-denominated securities in the second
half of 2023 (Chart 20) whose market value was negatively affected by the increase
in US dollar bond yields during this period (Chart 18).
Chart 19
Realised gains/losses arising from financial operations
(EUR millions)
400
342
300
197
200
354
241
100 178
3
0 1 9 0 (1 6 9) (46)( 3 6 7 ) (92) (9 1 1 1 )
-100 (26)
(110) (106)
-200
(258)
-300
-400
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Source: ECB.
Chart 20
Quarterly realised gains/losses arising from financial operations in 2022 and 2023
(EUR millions)
Source: ECB.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 23
snoilliM
Net realised price losses
were mainly driven by
outstanding premiums
on ABSPP securities
repaid before maturity
Total
Net realised price gains/(losses) on financial transactions in foreign currency
Net realised price gains/(losses) on financial transactions in euro
Net realised exchange rate and gold price gains
Total
Net realised price gains/(losses) on financial transactions in foreign currency
Net realised price gains/(losses) on financial transactions in euro
Net realised exchange rate and gold price gains
200
150
96
100
50 195
0 (3 1 4 0 ) (4 2 0 1 ) ( 1 9 5 ) (9) ( 3 4 ( 6 2 3 ) ) 26 (2 7 1) (16) (1 5 2 (2 ) 3)
(8)
-50 (32) (73) (90) (64) (30)
(88) (67)
-100 (80)
(107)
-150
Q1 2022 Q2 2022 Q3 2022 Q4 2022 Q1 2023 Q2 2023 Q3 2023 Q4 2023
Unrealised revaluation losses are expensed in the form of write-downs at the year-
end in the ECB’s profit and loss account. In 2023 these write-downs amounted to
€38 million, mainly stemming from unrealised price losses on a number of securities
held in the US dollar and own funds portfolios. In 2022 these losses were
substantially higher at €1,840 million (Chart 21), as the corresponding yields had
increased significantly, resulting in a large reduction in the market value of the
majority of securities held in the own funds and US dollar portfolios at the end of that
year.
Chart 21
Write-downs on financial assets and positions
(EUR millions)
Source: ECB.
The total operating expenses of the ECB, including depreciation and banknote
production services, increased by €48 million to €1,272 million (Chart 22). The
increase compared to 2022 was mainly due to higher staff costs resulting from the
higher average number of staff in 2023, predominantly in banking supervision, as
well as salary adjustments. This increase was partially offset by lower costs in
relation to post-employment benefits, mainly as a result of a lower current service
cost following the annual actuarial valuation. Administrative expenses increased,
mainly owing to higher expenses for external consultancy support and the return to
full levels of activity following the pandemic, in particular in banking supervision,
while also reflecting the impact of inflation.
Banking supervision-related expenses are fully covered by fees levied on the
supervised entities. Based on the actual expenses incurred by the ECB in the
performance of its banking supervision tasks, supervisory fee income for 2023 stood
at €654 million.17
17 Supervisory fee income is included under “Other income and expenses” (Chart 13).
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 24
-2
-4
-6
-8
-1 ,0
-1 ,2
-1 ,4
-1 ,6
-1 ,8
-2 ,0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
TPPE o ta l
ric e w rite -d
ric e w rite -d
xc h a n g e ra
(2 0 )
2 0 1 9
o w n
o w n
te w
s o n s e c u ritie s in fo re ig
s o n s e c u ritie s in e u ro
rite -d o w n s
(2 6 )
2 0 2 0
n c u rre n c y
(1 0 4 )
(1 3 3 )
2 0 2 1
(1 ,0 6 5 )
(7 7 5 )
(1 ,8 4 0 )
2 0 2 2 2
(3 8
0 2 3
)
€38 million
Price write-downs on
securities, mainly in the
US dollar and own funds
portfolios
€654 million
Supervisory fee income
Chart 22
Operating expenses and supervisory fee income
(EUR millions)
Source: ECB.
1.4 Risk management
Risk management is a critical part of the ECB’s activities and is conducted through a
continuous process of (i) risk identification and assessment, (ii) review of the risk
strategy and policies, (iii) implementation of risk-mitigating actions and (iv) risk
monitoring and reporting, all of which are supported by effective methodologies,
processes and systems.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 25
8
6
4
2
-2
-4
-6
-8
-1 ,0
-1 ,2
-1 ,4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
SADBS ta ff c o s ts
d m in istra tive e xp e n se s
e p re cia tio n o f ta n g ib le a n d in ta n g
a n kn o te p ro d u ctio n se rvice s
u p e rviso ry fe e in co m e
5 3 7 5 3 5
(5 6 6 ) (6 4 6 )
(1 ,1 5 6 ) (4 7 6 )
(4 3 4 )
(1 0 2 ) (1 0 6 ) (1 2 ) (1 4 )
2 0 1 9 2 0 2 0
ib le fixe d a sse
(1 ,1 9 9 )
ts
5 7 8
(6 7 4 )
(4 4 4 )
(1 0 8 ) (1 3 )
2 0 2 1
(1 ,2 3 8 )
5 9 4
(6 5 2 )
(4 6 0 )
(1 0 3 ) (9 )
2 0 2 2
(1 ,2 2 4 )
6 5 4
(6 7 6 )
(4 8 1 )
(1 0 6 ) (9 )
2 0 2 3
(1 ,2 7 2 )
Figure 2
Risk management cycle
The following sections focus on the risks, their sources and the applicable risk
control frameworks.
1.4.1 Financial risks
The Executive Board proposes policies and procedures that ensure an
appropriate level of protection against the financial risks to which the ECB is
exposed. The Risk Management Committee (RMC), which comprises experts from
Eurosystem central banks, contributes to the monitoring, measuring and reporting of
financial risks related to the balance sheet of the Eurosystem and defines and
reviews the associated methodologies and frameworks. In this way, the RMC helps
the decision-making bodies to ensure an appropriate level of protection for the
Eurosystem.
Financial risks arise from the ECB’s operations and associated exposures. The
risk control frameworks and limits that the ECB uses to manage its risk profile differ
across types of operation, reflecting the policy or investment objectives of the
different portfolios and the risk characteristics of the underlying assets.
To monitor and assess the risks, the ECB relies on a number of risk estimation
techniques developed by its experts. These techniques are based on a joint
market and credit risk simulation framework. The core modelling concepts,
techniques and assumptions underlying the risk measures draw on industry
standards and available market data. The risks are typically quantified as the
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 26
R is k
m o n ito rin g
a n d
re p o rtin g
M
R is k
id e n tific a tio n
a n d
a s s e s s m e n t
e th o d o lo g ie s ,
p ro c e s s e s
S y s te m s
R is k -
m itig a tin g
a c tio n s
s trap
R is k
te g y a
o lic ie s
n d
expected shortfall (ES)18, estimated at the 99% confidence level over a one-year
horizon. Two approaches are used to calculate risks: (i) the accounting approach,
under which the ECB’s revaluation accounts are considered as a buffer in the
calculation of risk estimates in line with applicable accounting rules; and (ii) the
financial approach, under which the revaluation accounts are not considered as a
buffer in the risk calculation. The ECB also calculates other risk measures at
different confidence levels, performs sensitivity and stress scenario analyses and
assesses longer-term projections of exposures and income to maintain a
comprehensive picture of the risks.19
The total risks of the ECB decreased during the year. At the end of 2023 the total
financial risks of the ECB’s balance sheet, as measured by the ES at the 99%
confidence level over a one-year horizon under the accounting approach, stood at
€16.7 billion, which was €1.6 billion lower than the risks estimated as at the end of
2022 (Chart 23). The decrease in risk reflects the reduction in the ECB’s holdings
under the APP, initially through the only partial reinvestment of principal payments
from maturing securities between March and June 2023, followed by the complete
discontinuation of reinvestments as of July 2023.
Chart 23
Total financial risks (ES 99%, accounting approach)
(EUR billions)
Source: ECB.
Note: The total financial risks as at the end of 2023 were calculated following methodological advances whereby interest rate risk
arising from mismatches between the interest rate earned on assets and the interest rate paid on liabilities was also included as a risk
contributor in the ES 99% measurement in addition to the regular monitoring of net income projections. The 2022 estimate was
recalculated to ensure comparability.
Credit risk arises from the ECB’s monetary policy portfolios, its euro-
denominated own funds portfolio and its foreign reserve holdings. While
securities held for monetary policy purposes are valued at amortised cost subject to
impairment and are therefore, in the absence of sales, not subject to price changes
18 The ES is defined as a probability-weighted average loss that occurs in the worst (1-p)% of scenarios,
where p denotes the confidence level.
19 Further details on the risk modelling approach can be found in The financial risk management of the
Eurosystem’s monetary policy operations, ECB, July 2015.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 27
2
1
1
0
6
2
8
4
0
8 .1
2 0 1 9
1 2 .8
2 0 2 0
1 5 .3
2 0 2 1
1 8 .3
2 0 2 2
- 8 .5 %
1 6 .7
2 0 2 3
€16.7 billion
Total risk (ES 99%,
accounting approach)
Credit risk
associated with credit migrations, they are still subject to credit default risk. Euro-
denominated own funds and foreign reserves are valued at market prices and, as
such, are subject to credit migration risk and credit default risk. Credit risk remained
largely stable relative to 2022.
Credit risk is mitigated mainly through the application of eligibility criteria, due
diligence procedures and limits that differ across portfolios.
Currency and commodity Currency and commodity risks arise from the ECB’s foreign currency and gold
risks
holdings. The currency risk remained broadly stable compared with 2022.
In view of the policy role of these assets, the ECB does not hedge the related
currency and commodity risks. Instead, these risks are mitigated through the
existence of revaluation accounts and the diversification of the holdings across
different currencies and gold.
Interest rate risk The ECB’s foreign reserves and euro-denominated own funds are mainly
invested in fixed income securities and are subject to mark-to-market interest
rate risk, given that they are valued at market prices. The ECB’s foreign reserves
are mainly invested in assets with relatively short maturities (see Chart 7 in
Section 1.3.1 “Balance sheet”), while the assets in the own funds portfolio generally
have longer maturities (see Chart 9 in Section 1.3.1 “Balance sheet”). The interest
rate risk of these portfolios, as measured under the accounting approach, decreased
compared to 2022, reflecting developments in market conditions.
The mark-to-market interest rate risk of the ECB is mitigated through asset allocation
policies and the revaluation accounts.
The ECB is also subject to interest rate risk arising from mismatches between
the interest rate earned on its assets and the interest rate paid on its liabilities,
which has an impact on its net interest income. This risk is not directly linked to any
particular portfolio but rather to the structure of the ECB’s balance sheet as a whole
and, in particular, the existence of maturity and yield mismatches between assets
and liabilities. In addition to its inclusion in the regular total financial risk
measurement over a one-year horizon, this risk is monitored by means of projections
of the ECB’s profitability over a medium to long-term horizon.
This type of risk is managed through asset allocation policies and is further mitigated
by the existence of unremunerated liabilities on the ECB’s balance sheet.
This notwithstanding, this risk materialised in 2023, resulting in financial losses being
projected over the next few years, after which the ECB is expected to return to
making sustained profits. The projected losses are mostly driven by a reduction in
the net interest income of the ECB. A large share of the medium to long-term assets
with fixed rate coupons were acquired when interest rates were very low or even
zero, and funded mainly by short-term liabilities, which are remunerated at the MRO
rate. As interest rates started rising in mid-2022, the cost of the liabilities rose above
the interest earned on the assets. Consequently, the previous year’s net interest
income turned into a net interest expense.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 28
Climate change risk The risks associated with climate change are gradually being incorporated into
the ECB’s risk management framework. In 2022 the Eurosystem conducted the
first climate stress test of the Eurosystem balance sheet20, which allowed a
preliminary estimate of the impact of this risk on the ECB’s balance sheet to be
obtained. In the coming years climate stress testing will be performed on a regular
basis, with the next exercise envisaged for 2024.
1.4.2 Operational risk
The Executive Board is responsible for and approves the ECB’s operational risk21
management (ORM) policy and framework. The Operational Risk Committee (ORC)
supports the Executive Board in the performance of its role in overseeing the
management of operational risks. ORM is an integral part of the ECB’s
governance structure22 and management processes.
The main objective of the ECB’s ORM framework is to contribute to ensuring that
the ECB achieves its mission and objectives, while protecting its reputation
and assets against loss, misuse and damage. Under the ORM framework, each
business area is responsible for identifying, assessing, responding to, reporting on
and monitoring its operational risks, incidents and controls. In this context, the ECB’s
risk tolerance policy provides guidance with regard to risk response strategies and
risk acceptance procedures. It is linked to a five-by-five risk matrix based on impact
and likelihood grading scales using quantitative and qualitative criteria.
The environment in which the ECB operates is exposed to increasingly
complex and interconnected threats and there are a wide range of operational
risks associated with the ECB’s day-to-day activities. The main areas of concern for
the ECB include a wide spectrum of non-financial risks resulting from people,
systems, processes and external events. Consequently, the ECB has put in place
processes to facilitate ongoing and effective management of its operational risks and
to integrate risk information into the decision-making process. Moreover, the ECB is
continuing to focus on enhancing its resilience, taking a broad view of risks and
opportunities from an end-to-end perspective, including sustainability aspects.
Response structures and contingency plans have been established to ensure the
continuity of critical business functions in the event of any disruption or crisis.
20 The results of the stress test for corporate bond holdings were incorporated into climate-related
disclosures on corporate bond holdings of euro area NCBs under the CSPP and the PEPP, which the
ECB started to publish annually from March 2023 onwards. For more details, see Climate-related
financial disclosures of the Eurosystem’s corporate sector holdings for monetary policy purposes, ECB,
March 2023.
In addition, the general qualitative results of this stress test were published in the ECB’s Economic
Bulletin. For more details, see “Results of the 2022 climate risk stress test of the Eurosystem balance
sheet”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 2, ECB, 2023.
21 Operational risk encompasses all non-financial risks and is defined as the risk of a negative business,
reputational and/or financial impact on the ECB resulting from people, the inadequate implementation
or failure of internal governance and business processes, the failure of systems on which processes
rely, or external events (e.g. natural disasters or external attacks).
22 Further information about the ECB’s governance structure can be found on the ECB’s website.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 29
1.4.3 Conduct risk
The ECB has a dedicated Compliance and Governance Office as a key risk
management function to strengthen the ECB’s governance framework in order
to address conduct risk.23 Its purpose is to support the Executive Board in protecting
the integrity and reputation of the ECB, to promote ethical standards of behaviour
and to strengthen the ECB’s accountability and transparency. An independent Ethics
Committee provides advice and guidance to high-level ECB officials on integrity and
conduct matters and supports the Governing Council in managing risks at executive
level appropriately and coherently. At the level of the Eurosystem and the Single
Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), the Ethics and Compliance Committee (ECC) works
towards achieving coherent implementation of the conduct frameworks for NCBs and
national competent authorities (NCAs).
In 2023 the ECC set up a Conduct Risk Task Force to compare the existing conduct
rules and the monitoring and reporting processes in place at the ECB, NCBs and
NCAs. The aim of the task force is to define minimum common standards and to
provide a simple conduct risk framework which can be extended and strengthened
over the years.
23 Conduct risk management has gained increasing attention in the corporate and public sector. It
complements financial and operational risk management and for the ECB can be defined as the
exposure of the institution to reputational damage, but also to financial or other types of harm that
negatively affect its interests, as a result of intentional or negligent actions carried out by its high-level
officials, employees or contractors that are not in conformance with the institution’s ethics, legal and
integrity rules or good governance and good administration standards.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Management report 30
2 Financial statements of the ECB
2.1 Balance sheet as at 31 December 2023
Note 2023 2022
ASSETS number € millions € millions
Gold and gold receivables 1 30,419 27,689
Claims on non-euro area residents denominated in foreign currency 2 55,876 55,603
Receivables from the IMF 2.1 2,083 1,759
Balances with banks and security investments, external loans and other
external assets 2.2 53,793 53,844
Claims on euro area residents denominated in foreign currency 2.2 1,450 1,159
Other claims on euro area credit institutions denominated in euro 3 17 12
Securities of euro area residents denominated in euro 4 425,349 457,271
Securities held for monetary policy purposes 4.1 425,349 457,271
Intra-Eurosystem claims 5 125,378 125,763
Claims related to the allocation of euro banknotes within the Eurosystem 5.1 125,378 125,763
Other assets 6 34,739 31,355
Tangible and intangible fixed assets 6.1 1,023 1,105
Other financial assets 6.2 22,172 21,213
Off-balance-sheet instruments revaluation differences 6.3 552 783
Accruals and prepaid expenses 6.4 10,905 7,815
Sundry 6.5 88 438
Loss for the year 1,266 -
Total assets 674,496 698,853
Note: Totals in the financial statements and in the tables included in the notes may not add up due to rounding. The figures 0 and (0)
indicate positive or negative amounts rounded to zero, while a dash (-) indicates zero.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 31
Note 2023 2022
LIABILITIES number € millions € millions
Banknotes in circulation 7 125,378 125,763
Other liabilities to euro area credit institutions denominated in euro 8 4,699 17,734
Liabilities to other euro area residents denominated in euro 9 20,622 63,863
General government 9.1 143 48,520
Other liabilities 9.2 20,479 15,343
Liabilities to non-euro area residents denominated in euro 10 23,111 78,108
Liabilities to non-euro area residents denominated in foreign currency 11 24 -
Deposits, balances and other liabilities 11.1 24 -
Intra-Eurosystem liabilities 12 445,048 355,474
Liabilities equivalent to the transfer of foreign reserves 12.1 40,671 40,344
Other liabilities within the Eurosystem (net) 12.2 404,377 315,130
Other liabilities 13 9,498 5,908
Off-balance-sheet instruments revaluation differences 13.1 68 430
Accruals and income collected in advance 13.2 8,030 3,915
Sundry 13.3 1,401 1,562
Provisions 14 67 6,636
Revaluation accounts 15 37,099 36,487
Capital and reserves 16 8,948 8,880
Capital 16.1 8,948 8,880
Total liabilities 674,496 698,853
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 32
2.2 Profit and loss account for the year ending 31 December
2023
Note 2023 2022
number € millions € millions
Interest income on foreign reserve assets 23.1 2,382 798
Interest income arising from the allocation of euro banknotes within the
Eurosystem 23.2 4,817 736
Other interest income 23.4 56,552 11,001
Interest income 63,751 12,536
Remuneration of NCBs’ claims in respect of foreign reserves transferred 23.3 (1,335) (201)
Other interest expense 23.4 (69,609) (11,434)
Interest expense (70,944) (11,636)
Net interest income 23 (7,193) 900
Realised gains/losses arising from financial operations 24 (106) (110)
Write-downs on financial assets and positions 25 (38) (1,840)
Transfer to/from provisions for financial risks 6,620 1,627
Net result of financial operations, write-downs and risk provisions 6,476 (322)
Net income/expense from fees and commissions 26 650 585
Income from equity shares and participating interests 27 1 1
Other income 28 72 61
Total net income 6 1,224
Staff costs 29 (676) (652)
Administrative expenses 30 (481) (460)
Depreciation of tangible and intangible fixed assets (106) (103)
Banknote production services 31 (9) (9)
Profit/(loss) for the year (1,266) -
Frankfurt am Main, 13 February 2024
European Central Bank
Christine Lagarde
President
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 33
2.3 Accounting policies
Form and presentation of the financial statements
The financial statements of the ECB have been drawn up in accordance with the
following accounting policies,24 which, in the view of the Governing Council of the
ECB, achieve a fair presentation of the financial statements, reflecting at the same
time the nature of central bank activities.
Accounting principles
The following accounting principles have been applied: economic reality and
transparency, prudence, recognition of post-balance-sheet events, materiality, going
concern, the accruals principle, consistency and comparability.
Recognition of assets and liabilities
An asset or liability is only recognised in the balance sheet when it is probable that
any associated future economic benefit will flow to or from the ECB, substantially all
of the associated risks and rewards have been transferred to the ECB, and the cost
or value of the asset or the amount of the obligation can be measured reliably.
Basis of accounting
The accounts have been prepared on a historical cost basis, modified to include the
market valuation of marketable securities (other than securities currently held for
monetary policy purposes), gold and all other on-balance-sheet and off-balance-
sheet assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currency.
Transactions in financial assets and liabilities are reflected in the accounts on the
basis of the date on which they were settled.
With the exception of spot transactions in securities, transactions in financial
instruments denominated in foreign currency are recorded in off-balance-sheet
accounts on the trade date. At the settlement date, the off-balance-sheet entries are
reversed, and transactions are booked on-balance-sheet. Purchases and sales of
24 The detailed accounting policies of the ECB are laid down in Decision (EU) 2016/2247 of the ECB of 3
November 2016 on the annual accounts of the ECB (ECB/2016/35) (OJ L 347, 20.12.2016, p. 1), as
amended. The unofficial consolidated text with the list of amendments can be found here.
In order to ensure the harmonised accounting and financial reporting of Eurosystem operations, the
above-mentioned Decision is based on Guideline (EU) 2016/2249 of the ECB of 3 November 2016 on
the legal framework for accounting and financial reporting in the European System of Central Banks
(ECB/2016/34) (OJ L 347, 20.12.2016, p. 37), as amended. The unofficial consolidated text with the list
of amendments can be found here.
These policies, which are reviewed and updated regularly as deemed appropriate, are consistent with
the provisions of Article 26.4 of the Statute of the ESCB, which require a harmonised approach to the
rules governing the accounting and financial reporting of Eurosystem operations.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 34
foreign currency affect the net foreign currency position on the trade date, and
realised results arising from sales are also calculated on that date. Accrued interest,
premiums and discounts related to financial instruments denominated in foreign
currency are calculated and recorded daily, and the foreign currency position is also
affected daily by these accruals.
Gold and foreign currency assets and liabilities
Assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currency are converted into euro at the
exchange rate prevailing on the balance sheet date. Income and expenses are
converted at the exchange rate prevailing on the recording date. The revaluation of
foreign exchange assets and liabilities, including on-balance-sheet and off-balance-
sheet instruments, is performed on a currency-by-currency basis.
Revaluation to the market price for assets and liabilities denominated in foreign
currency is treated separately from the exchange rate revaluation.
Gold is valued at the market price prevailing at the balance sheet date. No distinction
is made between the price and currency revaluation differences for gold. Instead, a
single gold valuation is accounted for on the basis of the price in euro per fine ounce
of gold, which, for the year ending 31 December 2023, was derived from the
exchange rate of the euro against the US dollar on 29 December 2023.
The special drawing right (SDR) is defined in terms of a basket of currencies and its
value is determined by the weighted sum of the exchange rates of five major
currencies (the US dollar, euro, Chinese renminbi, Japanese yen and pound
sterling). The ECB’s holdings of SDRs were converted into euro using the exchange
rate of the euro against the SDR as at 29 December 2023.
Securities
Securities held for monetary policy purposes
Securities currently held for monetary policy purposes are accounted for at
amortised cost subject to impairment.
Other securities
Marketable securities (other than securities currently held for monetary policy
purposes) and similar assets are valued either at the mid-market prices or on the
basis of the relevant yield curve prevailing on the balance sheet date, on a security-
by-security basis. Options embedded in securities are not separated for valuation
purposes. For the year ending 31 December 2023, mid-market prices on 29
December 2023 were used.
Marketable investment funds are revalued on a net basis at fund level, using their
net asset value. No netting is applied between unrealised gains and losses in
different investment funds.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 35
Illiquid equity shares and any other equity instruments held as permanent
investments are valued at cost subject to impairment.
Income recognition
Income and expenses are recognised in the period in which they are earned or
incurred.25 Realised gains and losses resulting from the sale of foreign currency,
gold and securities are recorded in the profit and loss account. Such realised gains
and losses are calculated by reference to the average cost of the respective asset.
Unrealised gains are not recognised as income and are transferred directly to a
revaluation account.
Unrealised losses are recorded in the profit and loss account if, at the year-end, they
exceed previous revaluation gains accumulated in the corresponding revaluation
account. Such unrealised losses on any one security or currency or on gold are not
netted against unrealised gains on other securities or currencies or gold. In the event
of such unrealised losses on any item recorded in the profit and loss account, the
average cost of that item is reduced to the year-end exchange rate or market price.
Impairment losses are recorded in the profit and loss account and are not reversed
in subsequent years unless the impairment decreases and the decrease can be
related to an observable event that occurred after the impairment was first recorded.
Premiums or discounts arising on securities are amortised over the securities’
remaining contractual life.
Reverse transactions
Reverse transactions are operations whereby the ECB buys or sells assets under a
repurchase agreement or conducts credit operations against collateral.
Under a repurchase agreement, securities are sold for cash with a simultaneous
agreement to repurchase them from the counterparty at an agreed price on a set
future date. Repurchase agreements are recorded as collateralised deposits on the
liability side of the balance sheet. Securities sold under such an agreement remain
on the balance sheet of the ECB.
Under a reverse repurchase agreement, securities are bought for cash with a
simultaneous agreement to sell them back to the counterparty at an agreed price on
a set future date. Reverse repurchase agreements are recorded as collateralised
loans on the asset side of the balance sheet, but are not included in the ECB’s
security holdings.
Reverse transactions (including securities lending transactions) conducted under a
programme offered by a specialised institution are recorded on the balance sheet
25 A minimum threshold of €100,000 applies for administrative accruals and provisions.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 36
only where collateral has been provided in the form of cash and this cash remains
uninvested.
Off-balance-sheet instruments
Currency instruments, namely foreign exchange forward transactions, forward legs
of foreign exchange swaps and other currency instruments involving an exchange of
one currency for another at a future date, are included in the net foreign currency
position for the purpose of calculating foreign exchange gains and losses.
Interest rate instruments are revalued on an item-by-item basis. Daily changes in the
variation margin of open interest rate futures contracts are recorded in the profit and
loss account. The valuation of forward transactions in securities is carried out by the
ECB based on generally accepted valuation methods using observable market
prices and rates, as well as discount factors from the settlement dates to the
valuation date.
Fixed assets
Fixed assets, including intangible assets, but excluding land and works of art, are
valued at cost less depreciation. Land and works of art are valued at cost. The
ECB’s main building is valued at cost less depreciation subject to impairment. For
the depreciation of the ECB’s main building, costs are assigned to the appropriate
asset components, which are depreciated in accordance with their estimated useful
lives. Depreciation is calculated on a straight-line basis over the expected useful life
of the asset, beginning in the quarter after the asset is available for use. The useful
lives applied for the main asset classes are as follows:
Buildings 20, 25 or 50 years
Plant in building 10 or 15 years
Technical equipment 4, 10 or 15 years
Computers, related hardware and software, and motor vehicles 4 years
Furniture 10 years
The depreciation period for capitalised refurbishment expenditure relating to the
ECB’s existing rented premises is adjusted to take account of any events that have
an impact on the expected useful life of the affected asset.
The ECB performs an annual impairment test of its main building and right-of-use
assets relating to office buildings (see “Leases” below). If an impairment indicator is
identified, and it is assessed that the asset may be impaired, the recoverable amount
is estimated. An impairment loss is recorded in the profit and loss account if the
recoverable amount is less than the net book value.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 37
Fixed assets costing less than €10,000 are written off in the year of acquisition.
Fixed assets that comply with the capitalisation criteria, but are still under
construction or development, are recorded under the heading “Assets under
construction”. The related costs are transferred to the relevant fixed asset headings
once the assets are available for use.
Leases
The ECB acts both as a lessee and a sub-lessor.
The ECB as a lessee
For all leases for which the ECB is a lessee and which involve a tangible asset, the
related right-of-use asset and lease liability are recognised on the balance sheet at
the lease commencement date, i.e. once the asset is available for use, and are
included under the relevant fixed asset headings of “Tangible and intangible fixed
assets” and under “Sundry” (liabilities) respectively. Where leases comply with the
capitalisation criteria, but the asset involved is still under construction or adaptation,
the incurred costs before the lease commencement date are recorded under the
heading “Assets under construction”.
Right-of-use assets are valued at cost less depreciation. In addition, right-of-use
assets relating to office buildings are subject to impairment (regarding the annual
impairment test, see “Fixed assets” above). Depreciation is calculated on a straight-
line basis from the commencement date to either the end of the useful life of the
right-of-use asset or the end of the lease term, whichever is earlier.
The lease liability is initially measured at the present value of the future lease
payments (comprising only lease components), discounted using the ECB's
incremental borrowing rate. Subsequently, the lease liability is measured at
amortised cost using the effective interest method. The related interest expense is
recorded in the profit and loss account under “Other interest expense”. When there is
a change in future lease payments arising from a change in an index or other
reassessment of the existing contract, the lease liability is remeasured. Any such
remeasurement results in a corresponding adjustment to the carrying amount of the
right-of-use asset.
Short-term leases with a duration of 12 months or less and leases of low-value
assets below €10,000 (consistent with the threshold used for the recognition of fixed
assets) are recorded as an expense in the profit and loss account.
The ECB as a sub-lessor
For all leases for which the ECB is a sub-lessor, the ECB grants to third parties the
right to use the underlying asset (or a part of such asset), while the lease between
the original lessor and the ECB (head lease) remains in effect. The sub-lease is
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 38
classified as a finance or operating lease26 by reference to the right-of-use asset
arising from the head lease, rather than by reference to the underlying asset.
The sub-leases for which the ECB is a sub-lessor are classified as a finance lease
and the ECB derecognises from “Tangible and intangible fixed assets” the right-of-
use asset relating to the head lease (or a part of such asset) that is transferred to the
sub-lessee, and recognises under “Sundry” (assets) a sub-lease receivable. The
lease liability relating to the head lease remains unaffected by the sub-lease.
At the commencement date, the sub-lease receivable is initially measured at the
present value of the future lease payments accruing to the ECB, discounted using
the discount rate used for the head lease. Subsequently, the sub-lease receivable is
measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method. The related interest
income is recorded in the profit and loss account under “Other interest income”.
The ECB’s post-employment benefits, other long-term benefits and
termination benefits
The ECB operates defined benefit plans for its staff and the members of the
Executive Board, as well as for the members of the Supervisory Board employed by
the ECB.
The staff pension plan is funded by assets held in a long-term employee benefit
fund. The compulsory contributions made by the ECB and the staff are reflected in
the defined benefit pillar of the plan. Staff can make additional contributions on a
voluntary basis in a defined contribution pillar that can be used to provide additional
benefits.27 These additional benefits are determined by the amount of voluntary
contributions together with the investment returns arising from those contributions.
Unfunded arrangements are in place for the post-employment and other long-term
benefits of members of the Executive Board and members of the Supervisory Board
employed by the ECB. For staff, unfunded arrangements are in place for post-
employment benefits other than pensions and for other long-term benefits.
Net defined benefit liability
The liability recognised in the balance sheet under “Sundry” (liabilities) in respect of
the defined benefit plans, including other long-term benefits and termination
benefits28, is the present value of the defined benefit obligation at the balance sheet
date, less the fair value of plan assets used to fund the related obligation.
26 A lease is classified as a finance lease if it transfers substantially all the risks and rewards incidental to
ownership of an underlying asset, otherwise it is classified as an operating lease.
27 The funds accumulated by a staff member through voluntary contributions can be used at retirement to
purchase an additional pension. This pension is included in the defined benefit obligation from that
point on.
28 All remaining termination benefits related to the temporary Career Transition Support scheme
introduced by the ECB in 2017 were paid during 2023 and therefore the ECB had no related liabilities
as at 31 December 2023.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 39
The defined benefit obligation is calculated annually by independent actuaries using
the projected unit credit method. The present value of the defined benefit obligation
is calculated by discounting the estimated future cash flows using a rate which is
determined by reference to market yields at the balance sheet date on high-quality
euro-denominated corporate bonds that have similar terms to maturity to the related
obligation.
Actuarial gains and losses can arise from experience adjustments (where actual
outcomes are different from the actuarial assumptions previously made) and
changes in actuarial assumptions.
Net defined benefit cost
The net defined benefit cost is split into components reported in the profit and loss
account and remeasurements in respect of post-employment benefits shown in the
balance sheet under “Revaluation accounts”.
The net amount charged to the profit and loss account comprises:
1. the current service cost of the defined benefits accruing for the year;
2. the past service cost of the defined benefits resulting from a plan amendment;
3. net interest at the discount rate on the net defined benefit liability;
4. remeasurements in respect of other long-term benefits and termination benefits
of a long-term nature29, if any, in their entirety.
The net amount shown under “Revaluation accounts” comprises the following items:
1. actuarial gains and losses on the defined benefit obligation;
2. the actual return on plan assets, excluding amounts included in the net interest
on the net defined benefit liability;
3. any change in the effect of the asset ceiling, excluding amounts included in the
net interest on the net defined benefit liability.
These amounts are valued annually by independent actuaries to establish the
appropriate liability in the financial statements.
Intra-ESCB balances/intra-Eurosystem balances
Intra-ESCB balances result primarily from cross-border payments in the European
Union (EU) that are settled in central bank money in euro. These transactions are for
the most part initiated by private entities (i.e. credit institutions, corporations and
individuals). They are settled in TARGET – the Trans-European Automated Real-
time Gross settlement Express Transfer system – and give rise to bilateral balances
in the TARGET accounts of EU central banks. Payments conducted by the ECB and
29 Since the ECB had no liabilities related to the Career Transition Scheme as at 31 December 2023, no
related remeasurements were charged in 2023.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 40
the national central banks (NCBs) also affect these accounts. All settlements are
automatically aggregated and adjusted to form part of a single position for each NCB
vis-à-vis the ECB. These positions in the books of the ECB represent the net claim
or liability of each NCB against the rest of the European System of Central Banks
(ESCB). The movements in TARGET accounts are reflected in the accounting
records of the ECB and the NCBs on a daily basis.
Intra-Eurosystem balances of euro area NCBs vis-à-vis the ECB arising from
TARGET, as well as other intra-Eurosystem balances denominated in euro (e.g. the
ECB’s interim profit distribution to NCBs, if any), are presented on the balance sheet
of the ECB as a single net asset or liability position under either “Other claims within
the Eurosystem (net)” or “Other liabilities within the Eurosystem (net)”. Intra-ESCB
balances of non-euro area NCBs vis-à-vis the ECB, arising from their participation in
TARGET,30 are disclosed under “Liabilities to non-euro area residents denominated
in euro”.
Intra-Eurosystem balances arising from the allocation of euro banknotes within the
Eurosystem are included as a single net asset under “Claims related to the allocation
of euro banknotes within the Eurosystem” (see “Banknotes in circulation” below).
Intra-Eurosystem balances arising from the transfer of foreign reserve assets to the
ECB by NCBs joining the Eurosystem are denominated in euro and reported under
“Liabilities equivalent to the transfer of foreign reserves”.
Banknotes in circulation
The ECB and the euro area NCBs, which together constitute the Eurosystem, issue
euro banknotes.31 The total value of euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the
Eurosystem central banks on the last working day of each month in accordance with
the banknote allocation key.32
The ECB has been allocated an 8% share of the total value of euro banknotes in
circulation, which is disclosed in the balance sheet under the liability item “Banknotes
in circulation”. The ECB’s share of the total euro banknote issue is backed by claims
on the NCBs. These claims, which bear interest,33 are disclosed under the item
“Claims related to the allocation of euro banknotes within the Eurosystem” (see
“Intra-ESCB balances/intra-Eurosystem balances” above). Interest income on these
30 As at 31 December 2023 the non-euro area NCBs participating in TARGET were Българска народна
банка (Bulgarian National Bank), Danmarks Nationalbank, Narodowy Bank Polski and Banca Naţională
a României.
31 Decision of the ECB of 13 December 2010 on the issue of euro banknotes (ECB/2010/29)
(2011/67/EU) (OJ L 35, 9.2.2011, p. 26), as amended. The unofficial consolidated text with the list of
amendments can be found here.
32 “Banknote allocation key” means the percentages that result from taking into account the ECB’s share
in the total euro banknote issue and applying the subscribed capital key to the NCBs’ share in that total.
33 Decision (EU) 2016/2248 of the ECB of 3 November 2016 on the allocation of monetary income of the
national central banks of Member States whose currency is the euro (ECB/2016/36) (OJ L 347,
20.12.2016, p. 26), as amended. The unofficial consolidated text with the list of amendments can be
found here.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 41
claims is included in the profit and loss account under the item “Interest income
arising from the allocation of euro banknotes within the Eurosystem”.
Interim profit distribution
An amount that is equal to the sum of the ECB’s income on euro banknotes in
circulation and income arising from the securities held for monetary policy purposes
purchased under (i) the Securities Markets Programme; (ii) the third covered bond
purchase programme; (iii) the asset-backed securities purchase programme; (iv) the
public sector purchase programme; and (v) the pandemic emergency purchase
programme is distributed in January of the following year by means of an interim
profit distribution, unless otherwise decided by the Governing Council.34 Any such
decision shall be taken where, on the basis of a reasoned estimate prepared by the
Executive Board, the Governing Council expects that the ECB will have an overall
annual loss or will make an annual profit that is less than this income. The Governing
Council may also decide to transfer all or part of this income to a provision for
financial risks. Furthermore, the Governing Council may decide to reduce the
amount of the income on euro banknotes in circulation to be distributed in January
by the amount of the costs incurred by the ECB in connection with the issue and
handling of euro banknotes.
Post-balance-sheet events
The values of assets and liabilities are adjusted for events that occur between the
annual balance sheet date and the date on which the Executive Board authorises the
submission of the ECB’s Annual Accounts to the Governing Council for approval, if
such events materially affect the condition of assets and liabilities at the balance
sheet date.
Important post-balance-sheet events that do not affect the condition of assets and
liabilities at the balance sheet date are disclosed in the notes.
Changes to accounting policies
In 2023 there were no changes to the accounting policies applied by the ECB.
Other issues
In accordance with Article 27 of the Statute of the ESCB, and on the basis of a
recommendation of the Governing Council, the Council of the EU initially approved
the appointment of Baker Tilly GmbH & Co. KG Wirtschaftsprüfungsgesellschaft,
34 Decision (EU) 2015/298 of the ECB of 15 December 2014 on the interim distribution of the income of
the ECB (ECB/2014/57) (OJ L 53, 25.2.2015, p. 24), as amended. The unofficial consolidated text with
the list of amendments can be found here.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 42
Düsseldorf (Federal Republic of Germany) as the external auditors of the ECB for a
five-year period up to the end of the financial year 2022. In 2023 the Council of the
EU, based on a recommendation by the Governing Council, approved an extension
of this period by two additional years until the end of the financial year 2024.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 43
2.4 Notes on the balance sheet
Note 1 - Gold and gold receivables
This item comprised the ECB’s holdings of gold:
2023 2022
Quantity
Ounces of fine gold1 16,285,778 16,229,522
Price
US dollar per fine ounce of gold 2,063.950 1,819.700
US dollar per euro 1.1050 1.0666
Market value (€ millions) 30,419 27,689
1) This corresponds to 506.5 and 504.8 tonnes in 2023 and 2022 respectively.
The increase in the euro equivalent value of ECB’s gold holdings was primarily due
to the rise in the market price of gold in euro terms (see “Gold and foreign currency
assets and liabilities” in Section 2.3 “Accounting policies” and note 15 “Revaluation
accounts”). Additionally, upon the adoption of the single currency by Croatia with
effect from 1 January 2023, Hrvatska narodna banka transferred to the ECB 56,256
ounces of fine gold with a value of €96 million.
Note 2 - Claims on non-euro area and euro area residents
denominated in foreign currency
Note 2.1 - Receivables from the IMF
This asset represents the ECB’s holdings of SDRs and amounted to €2,083 million
as at 31 December 2023 (2022: €1,759 million). It arises as the result of a two-way
SDR buying and selling voluntary trading arrangement with the International
Monetary Fund (IMF), whereby the IMF is authorised to arrange sales or purchases
of SDRs against euro, on behalf of the ECB, within minimum and maximum holding
levels. For accounting purposes, SDRs are treated as a foreign currency (see “Gold
and foreign currency assets and liabilities” in Section 2.3 “Accounting policies”). The
ECB’s holdings of SDRs increased in 2023, predominantly as a result of a
transaction that took place in the context of the above-mentioned voluntary trading
arrangement.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 44
Note 2.2 - Balances with banks and security investments, external
loans and other external assets; and claims on euro area residents
denominated in foreign currency
These two items consist of balances with banks and loans denominated in foreign
currency, and investments in securities denominated in US dollars, Japanese yen
and Chinese renminbi.
2023 2022 Change
€ millions € millions € millions
Claims on non-euro area residents
Current accounts 7,161 15,687 (8,526)
Money market deposits 474 985 (512)
Security investments 46,158 37,172 8,986
Total claims on non-euro area residents 53,793 53,844 (52)
Claims on euro area residents
Current accounts 25 34 (10)
Money market deposits 1,426 1,125 301
Total claims on euro area residents 1,450 1,159 291
Total 55,243 55,004 239
The total value of these items increased in 2023, mainly owing to the income earned
during the year, primarily on the US dollar portfolio. Additionally, upon the adoption
of the single currency by Croatia with effect from 1 January 2023, Hrvatska narodna
banka transferred to the ECB foreign reserve assets denominated in US dollars with
a value of €544 million. However, the total increase was almost entirely offset by the
depreciation of the US dollar and the Japanese yen against the euro.
The ECB’s net foreign currency holdings35 were as follows:
35 These holdings comprise assets minus liabilities denominated in the given foreign currency that are
subject to foreign currency revaluation. They are included under the headings “Claims on non-euro
area residents denominated in foreign currency”, “Claims on euro area residents denominated in
foreign currency”, “Accruals and prepaid expenses”, “Liabilities to non-euro area residents
denominated in foreign currency”, “Off-balance-sheet instruments revaluation differences” (liabilities
side) and “Accruals and income collected in advance” and take into account foreign exchange forward
and swap transactions included in off-balance-sheet items. Price gains on financial instruments
denominated in foreign currency arising as a result of revaluations are not included.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 45
2023 2022
Foreign currency in Foreign currency in
millions millions
US dollars 52,590 49,590
Japanese yen 1,089,844 1,090,312
Chinese renminbi 4,545 4,440
No foreign exchange interventions took place during 2023.
Note 3 - Other claims on euro area credit institutions denominated
in euro
As at 31 December 2023 this item consisted of current account balances with euro
area residents amounting to €17 million (2022: €12 million).
Note 4 - Securities of euro area residents denominated in euro
Note 4.1 - Securities held for monetary policy purposes
As at 31 December 2023 this item consisted of securities acquired by the ECB within
the scope of the Securities Markets Programme (SMP), the third covered bond
purchase programme (CBPP3), the asset-backed securities purchase programme
(ABSPP), the public sector purchase programme (PSPP) and the pandemic
emergency purchase programme (PEPP).
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 46
Start date End date Decision Universe of eligible securities1
Completed/Terminated programmes
CBPP12 July 2009 June 2010 ECB/2009/16 Covered bonds of euro area residents
CBPP22 November 2011 October 2012 ECB/2011/17 Covered bonds of euro area residents
SMP May 2010 September 2012 ECB/2010/5 Public and private debt securities issued in the euro area3
Asset purchase programme (APP)4
CBPP3 October 2014 active ECB/2020/8, Covered bonds of euro area residents
as amended
ABSPP November 2014 active ECB/2014/45, Senior and guaranteed mezzanine tranches of asset-
as amended backed securities of euro area residents
PSPP March 2015 active ECB/2020/9 Bonds issued by euro area central, regional or local
governments or recognised agencies as well as by
international organisations and multilateral development
banks located in the euro area
CSPP5 June 2016 active ECB/2016/16, Bonds and commercial paper issued by non-bank
as amended corporations established in the euro area
Pandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP)
PEPP March 2020 active ECB/2020/17, All asset categories eligible under the APP
as amended
1) Further eligibility criteria for the specific programmes can be found in the Governing Council’s decisions.
2) At the end of 2022 and the end of 2023, the ECB did not have any holdings of securities under the first and second covered bond
purchase programmes (CBPP1 and CBPP2). However, in 2022 the ECB still recorded interest income from these portfolios, since the
last holdings under the CBPP1 and the CBPP2 matured in July 2022 and September 2022 respectively.
3)Only public debt securities issued by five euro area treasuries were purchased under the SMP.
4) The reinvestments under the asset purchase programme (APP) were discontinued as of 1 July 2023.
5) The ECB does not acquire securities under the corporate sector purchase programme (CSPP).
Until the end of February 202336, the Eurosystem continued reinvesting, in full, the
principal payments from maturing securities purchased under the asset purchase
programme (APP)37. Subsequently, the APP portfolio declined at a measured and
predictable pace. Until the end of June 2023, the decline amounted to €15 billion per
month on average, as the Eurosystem did not reinvest all of the principal payments
from maturing securities. In June 2023 the Governing Council decided38 to
discontinue the reinvestments under the APP as of July 2023. Thereafter, the APP
portfolio declined due to maturing securities.
With regard to the PEPP39, the Eurosystem continued reinvesting, in full, the
principal payments from maturing securities purchased throughout the year. The
Governing Council intends40 to continue to reinvest, in full, the principal payments
from maturing securities purchased under the PEPP during the first half of 2024. It
also intends to reduce the PEPP portfolio by €7.5 billion per month on average over
the second half of 2024 and to discontinue reinvestments at the end of the same
year. In addition, the Governing Council will continue applying flexibility in reinvesting
redemptions coming due in the PEPP portfolio, with a view to countering risks to the
monetary policy transmission mechanism related to the pandemic.
36 See the press release of 15 December 2022 on the Governing Council’s decisions.
37 Further details on the APP can be found on the ECB’s website.
38 See the press release of 15 June 2023 on the Governing Council’s decisions.
39 Further details on the PEPP can be found on the ECB’s website.
40 See the press release of 14 December 2023 on the Governing Council’s decisions.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 47
The securities purchased under these programmes are valued on an amortised cost
basis subject to impairment (see “Securities” in Section 2.3 “Accounting policies”).
The amortised cost of the securities held by the ECB and their market value41 (which
is not recorded on the balance sheet or in the profit and loss account and is provided
for comparison purposes only) were as follows:
2023 2022 Change
€ millions € millions € millions
Amortised Market Amortised Market Amortised Market
cost value cost value cost value
Completed/Terminated programmes
SMP 496 522 718 766 (222) (244)
APP
CBPP3 23,530 21,490 25,116 22,136 (1,587) (647)
ABSPP 13,348 13,225 22,895 22,605 (9,547) (9,379)
PSPP – government/agency securities 224,867 205,847 242,857 213,750 (17,991) (7,903)
Total APP 261,744 240,562 290,868 258,491 (29,124) (17,930)
PEPP
PEPP – covered bonds 839 736 769 628 70 108
PEPP – government/agency securities 162,270 143,669 164,916 138,072 (2,646) 5,597
Total PEPP 163,109 144,405 165,685 138,700 (2,576) 5,705
Total 425,349 385,489 457,271 397,957 (31,922) (12,468)
The amortised cost value of the securities held by the ECB changed during the year
as follows:
Gross Net discount/
2022 purchases Redemptions (premium)1 2023
€ millions € millions € millions € millions € millions
SMP 718 - (235) 13 496
CBPP3 25,116 1,512 (3,057) (42) 23,530
ABSPP 22,895 690 (10,142) (95) 13,348
PSPP – government/agency securities 242,857 10,141 (26,160) (1,971) 224,867
PEPP – covered bonds 769 85 (15) (1) 839
PEPP – government/agency securities 164,916 17,220 (17,922) (1,945) 162,270
Total 457,271 29,649 (57,530) (4,041) 425,349
1) "Net discount/(premium)" includes net realised gains/(losses), if any.
41 Market values are indicative and are derived on the basis of market quotes. When market quotes are
not available, market prices are estimated using internal Eurosystem models.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 48
The Governing Council assesses on a regular basis the financial risks associated
with the securities held under these programmes.
In this context, impairment tests are conducted on an annual basis, using data as at
the year-end, and are approved by the Governing Council. In these tests, impairment
indicators are assessed separately for each programme. In cases where impairment
indicators are observed, further analysis is performed to confirm that the cash flows
of the underlying securities have not been affected by an impairment event. Based
on the results of this year’s impairment tests, no losses have been recorded by the
ECB for the securities held in its monetary policy portfolios in 2023.
The amortised cost value of the securities held by the Eurosystem was as follows:
2023 2022
€ millions € millions
Euro area Total Euro area Total
ECB NCBs Eurosystem ECB NCBs Eurosystem
Completed/Terminated programmes
SMP 496 1,901 2,397 718 2,143 2,860
APP
CBPP3 23,530 262,090 285,620 25,116 276,857 301,973
ABSPP 13,348 - 13,348 22,895 - 22,895
PSPP – government/agency securities 224,867 1,922,907 2,147,774 242,857 2,066,581 2,309,438
PSPP – supranational securities - 255,261 255,261 - 275,228 275,228
CSPP - 323,921 323,921 - 344,119 344,119
Total APP 261,744 2,764,180 3,025,924 290,868 2,962,785 3,253,653
PEPP
PEPP – covered bonds 839 5,197 6,036 769 5,283 6,052
PEPP – government/agency securities 162,270 1,297,397 1,459,667 164,916 1,317,937 1,482,853
PEPP – supranational securities - 154,332 154,332 - 145,687 145,687
PEPP – corporate sector securities - 45,989 45,989 - 46,074 46,074
Total PEPP 163,109 1,502,915 1,666,024 165,685 1,514,981 1,680,666
Total 425,349 4,268,996 4,694,345 457,271 4,479,908 4,937,179
Note: “Euro area NCBs” figures are preliminary and may be subject to revision, which would also result in an equivalent change in the
“Total Eurosystem” figures.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 49
Note 5 - Intra-Eurosystem claims
Note 5.1 - Claims related to the allocation of euro banknotes within
the Eurosystem
This item consists of the claims of the ECB vis-à-vis the euro area NCBs relating to
the allocation of euro banknotes within the Eurosystem (see “Banknotes in
circulation” in Section 2.3 “Accounting policies”) and as at 31 December 2023
amounted to €125,378 million (2022: €125,763 million). The remuneration of these
claims is calculated daily at the latest available interest rate used by the Eurosystem
in its tenders for main refinancing operations (see note 23.2 “Interest income arising
from the allocation of euro banknotes within the Eurosystem”).
Note 6 - Other assets
Note 6.1 - Tangible and intangible fixed assets
These assets comprised the following items:
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 50
2023 2022 Change
€ millions € millions € millions
Cost
Land and buildings 1,014 1,007 7
Right-of-use buildings 315 296 19
Plant in building 222 222 -
Computer hardware and software 142 140 1
Equipment, furniture and motor vehicles 111 110 1
Right-of-use equipment 2 3 (1)
Assets under construction 0 5 (5)
Other fixed assets 11 11 (0)
Total cost 1,818 1,796 22
Accumulated depreciation
Land and buildings (227) (204) (23)
Right-of-use buildings (197) (152) (45)
Plant in building (144) (128) (16)
Computer hardware and software (129) (120) (9)
Equipment, furniture and motor vehicles (92) (82) (11)
Right-of-use equipment (2) (2) (0)
Other fixed assets (3) (3) (0)
Total accumulated depreciation (795) (690) (104)
Total net book value 1,023 1,105 (82)
In respect of the ECB’s main building and right-of-use office buildings, an impairment
test was conducted at the end of the year and no impairment loss was recorded.
Note 6.2 - Other financial assets
This item consists mainly of the ECB’s own funds portfolio, which predominantly
consists of investments of the ECB’s paid-up capital as well as of amounts set aside
in the general reserve fund and in the provision for financial risks. It also includes
3,211 shares in the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) at the acquisition cost of
€42 million and other current accounts denominated in euro.
The components of this item were as follows:
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 51
2023 2022 Change
€ millions € millions € millions
Current accounts in euro 46 38 8
Securities denominated in euro 20,355 19,280 1,075
Reverse repurchase agreements in euro 1,730 1,854 (124)
Other financial assets 42 42 (0)
Total 22,172 21,213 959
The net increase in this item in 2023 was primarily due to (i) the reinvestment of
interest income generated on the ECB’s own funds portfolio and (ii) the increase in
the market value of euro-denominated securities held in this portfolio.
Note 6.3 - Off-balance-sheet instruments revaluation differences
This item is composed primarily of valuation changes in swap and forward
transactions in foreign currency that were outstanding on 31 December 2023 (see
note 20 “Foreign exchange swap and forward transactions”). These valuation
changes amounted to €552 million (2022: €783 million) and are the result of the
conversion of such transactions into their euro equivalents at the exchange rates
prevailing on the balance sheet date, compared with the euro values resulting from
the conversion of the transactions at the average cost of the respective foreign
currency on that date (see “Off-balance-sheet instruments” and “Gold and foreign
currency assets and liabilities” in Section 2.3 “Accounting policies”).
Note 6.4 - Accruals and prepaid expenses
This item comprised the following components:
2023 2022 Change
€ millions € millions € millions
Accrued interest on TARGET balances due from NCBs 4,955 2,856 2,099
Accrued interest on claims related to the allocation of euro banknotes 1,429 575 855
Accrued interest on securities 3,709 3,640 69
Accrued income related to supervisory tasks 654 594 60
Other accruals and prepaid expenses 158 151 7
Total 10,905 7,815 3,090
As at 31 December 2023 this item included accrued interest receivable on TARGET
balances due from euro area NCBs for December 2023 (see note 12.2 “Other
liabilities within the Eurosystem (net)”) and accrued interest receivable from euro
area NCBs for the final quarter of 2023 in respect of the ECB’s claims related to the
allocation of euro banknotes within the Eurosystem (see note 5.1 “Claims related to
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 52
the allocation of euro banknotes within the Eurosystem”). These amounts were
settled in January 2024.
It also included accrued coupon interest on securities, including outstanding interest
paid at acquisition (see note 2.2 “Balances with banks and security investments,
external loans and other external assets; and claims on euro area residents
denominated in foreign currency”, note 4 “Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro” and note 6.2 “Other financial assets”).
Accrued income related to supervisory tasks corresponds to the supervisory fees to
be received for the fee period 2023 that will be collected in 2024 (see note 26 “Net
income/expense from fees and commissions”).42
The remainder of this item mainly comprised (i) accrued interest income on other
financial instruments; (ii) accrued income from ESCB projects and services in
operation (see note 28 “Other income”); and (iii) miscellaneous prepayments.
Note 6.5 - Sundry
On 31 December 2023 this item amounted to €88 million (2022: €438 million). It
included miscellaneous balances amounting to €60 million (2022: €90 million),
comprising mainly receivables in relation to ESCB projects and services in operation
(see note 28 “Other income”) and balances in respect of recoverable value added
tax.
It also included balances with a value of €28 million (2022: €349 million) related to
swap and forward transactions in foreign currency outstanding on 31 December
2023 (see note 20 “Foreign exchange swap and forward transactions”). These
balances arose from the conversion of such transactions into their euro equivalents
at the respective currency’s average cost on the balance sheet date, compared with
the euro values at which the transactions were initially recorded (see “Off-balance-
sheet instruments” in Section 2.3 “Accounting policies”).
Note 7 - Banknotes in circulation
This item consists of the ECB’s share (8%) of total euro banknotes in circulation (see
“Banknotes in circulation” in Section 2.3 “Accounting policies”), which as at 31
December 2023 amounted to €125,378 million (2022: €125,763 million).
Note 8 - Other liabilities to euro area credit institutions
denominated in euro
The Eurosystem central banks have the possibility of accepting cash as collateral in
their PSPP and public sector PEPP securities lending facilities without having to
42 Further details can be found on the ECB's banking supervision website.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 53
reinvest it. In the case of the ECB, these operations are conducted via a specialised
institution.
As at 31 December 2023 the outstanding value of such lending transactions against
cash collateral conducted with euro area credit institutions was €4,699 million (2022:
€17,734 million). Cash received as collateral was transferred to TARGET accounts.
As the cash remained uninvested at the year-end, these transactions were recorded
on the balance sheet (see “Reverse transactions” in Section 2.3 “Accounting
policies”).43
Note 9 - Liabilities to other euro area residents denominated in
euro
Note 9.1 - General government
As at 31 December 2023 this item amounted to €143 million (2022: €48,520 million)
and included deposits of the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) and the
European Stability Mechanism (ESM). In accordance with Article 21 of the Statute of
the ESCB, the ECB may act as fiscal agent for Union institutions, bodies, offices or
agencies, central governments, regional, local or other public authorities, other
bodies governed by public law, or public undertakings of Member States.
Note 9.2 - Other liabilities
This item consists of balances of the euro area ancillary systems44 connected to
TARGET through the TARGET-ECB component, which as at 31 December 2023
amounted to €20,479 million (2022: €15,343 million).
Note 10 - Liabilities to non-euro area residents denominated in
euro
This item comprised the following components:
43 Securities lending transactions that do not result in uninvested cash collateral at the year-end are
recorded in off-balance-sheet accounts (see note 17 “Securities lending programmes”).
44 Ancillary systems are financial market infrastructures that have been granted access to the TARGET-
ECB component by the Governing Council, provided they fulfil the requirements defined in Decision
(EU) 2022/911 of the ECB of 19 April 2022 concerning the terms and conditions of TARGET-ECB and
repealing Decision ECB/2007/7 (ECB/2022/22) (OJ L 163, 17.6.2022, p. 1), as amended. The unofficial
consolidated text with the list of amendments can be found here. Depending on the managing entity,
the ancillary systems are considered either euro area residents (see note 9.2 “Other liabilities”) or non-
euro area residents (see note 10 “Liabilities to non-euro area residents denominated in euro”). Further
details on ancillary systems can be found on the ECB’s website.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 54
2023 2022 Change
€ millions € millions € millions
TARGET balances 3,854 42,808 (38,954)
Cash received as collateral in securities lending transactions 5,637 15,008 (9,372)
Deposits accepted by the ECB in its role as fiscal agent 12,383 19,904 (7,522)
Liquidity-providing swap arrangements 1,237 388 850
Total 23,111 78,108 (54,997)
As at 31 December 2023 the largest component of this item was deposits accepted
by the ECB in its role as fiscal agent for the European Commission, relating to the
administration of EU borrowing and lending activities (see note 21 “Administration of
borrowing and lending operations”).
This item also included balances arising from outstanding PSPP and public sector
PEPP securities lending transactions conducted with non-euro area credit institutions
in which cash was received as collateral and transferred to TARGET accounts (see
note 8 “Other liabilities to euro area credit institutions denominated in euro”).
Furthermore, it included TARGET balances, consisting of TARGET balances of non-
euro area NCBs vis-à-vis the ECB (see “Intra-ESCB balances/intra-Eurosystem
balances” in Section 2.3 “Accounting policies”) and of the non-euro area ancillary
systems connected to TARGET through the TARGET-ECB component. The
decrease in these balances in 2023 corresponds to lower balances of the non-euro
area ancillary systems.
The remainder of this item consists of a balance arising from the standing reciprocal
currency arrangement with the Federal Reserve System. Under this arrangement,
US dollars are provided by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to the ECB by
means of swap transactions, with the aim of offering short-term US dollar funding to
Eurosystem counterparties. The ECB simultaneously enters into back-to-back swap
transactions with euro area NCBs, which use the resulting funds to conduct US
dollar liquidity-providing operations with Eurosystem counterparties in the form of
reverse transactions. The back-to-back swap transactions result in intra-Eurosystem
balances between the ECB and the euro area NCBs. Furthermore, the swap
transactions conducted with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the euro
area NCBs result in forward claims and liabilities that are recorded in off-balance-
sheet accounts (see note 20 “Foreign exchange swap and forward transactions”).
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 55
Note 11 - Liabilities to non-euro area residents denominated in
foreign currency
Note 11.1 - Deposits, balances and other liabilities
As at 31 December 2023 this item consisted of a liability in foreign currency vis-à-vis
a non-euro area resident amounting to €24 million (2022: zero), which arose in the
context of the management of the ECB’s foreign reserves.
Note 12 - Intra-Eurosystem liabilities
Note 12.1 - Liabilities equivalent to the transfer of foreign reserves
These represent the liabilities to euro area NCBs that arose from the transfer of
foreign reserve assets to the ECB when they joined the Eurosystem. In line with
Article 30.2 of the Statute of the ESCB, these contributions are fixed in proportion to
the NCBs’ shares in the subscribed capital of the ECB. Hrvatska narodna banka’s
transfer of foreign reserve assets upon Croatia’s adoption of the single currency led
to an increase in these liabilities.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 56
Since As at
1 January 2023 31 December 2022
€ millions € millions
Nationale Bank van België/Banque Nationale de Belgique (Belgium) 1,470 1,470
Deutsche Bundesbank (Germany) 10,635 10,635
Eesti Pank (Estonia) 114 114
Central Bank of Ireland (Ireland) 683 683
Bank of Greece (Greece) 998 998
Banco de España (Spain) 4,811 4,811
Banque de France (France) 8,240 8,240
Hrvatska narodna banka (Croatia) 327 -
Banca d’Italia (Italy) 6,854 6,854
Central Bank of Cyprus (Cyprus) 87 87
Latvijas Banka (Latvia) 157 157
Lietuvos bankas (Lithuania) 233 233
Banque centrale du Luxembourg (Luxembourg) 133 133
Central Bank of Malta (Malta) 42 42
De Nederlandsche Bank (The Netherlands) 2,364 2,364
Oesterreichische Nationalbank (Austria) 1,181 1,181
Banco de Portugal (Portugal) 944 944
Banka Slovenije (Slovenia) 194 194
Národná banka Slovenska (Slovakia) 462 462
Suomen Pankki – Finlands Bank (Finland) 741 741
Total 40,671 40,344
Hrvatska narodna banka’s claim was set at €327 million in order to ensure that the
ratio between this claim and the aggregate claim credited to the other NCBs of
Member States whose currency is the euro would be equal to the ratio between
Hrvatska narodna banka’s weighting in the ECB’s capital key and the other euro
area NCBs’ aggregate weighting in this key. The difference between the claim and
the value of the assets transferred (see note 1 “Gold and gold receivables” and note
2.2 “Balances with banks and security investments, external loans and other external
assets; and claims on euro area residents denominated in foreign currency”) was
treated as part of the contributions from Hrvatska narodna banka, due under Article
48.2 of the Statute of the ESCB, to the reserves and provisions equivalent to the
reserves of the ECB as at 31 December 2022 (see note 14 “Provisions” and note 15
“Revaluation accounts”).
The remuneration of these liabilities is calculated daily at the latest available interest
rate used by the Eurosystem in its tenders for main refinancing operations, adjusted
to reflect a zero return on the gold component (see note 23.3 “Remuneration of
NCBs’ claims in respect of foreign reserves transferred”).
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 57
Note 12.2 - Other liabilities within the Eurosystem (net)
In 2023 this item consisted predominantly of the TARGET balances of euro area
NCBs vis-à-vis the ECB (see “Intra-ESCB balances/intra-Eurosystem balances” in
Section 2.3 “Accounting policies”).
2023 2022
€ millions € millions
Net TARGET liability 404,336 315,090
Due to euro area NCBs in respect of TARGET 1,616,387 1,830,483
Due from euro area NCBs in respect of TARGET (1,212,050) (1,515,393)
Other liabilities within the Eurosystem 40 41
Total 404,377 315,130
The increase in the net TARGET liability was mainly attributable to the cash outflows
as a result of (i) lower deposits of the ESM and the EFSF (see note 9.1 “General
government”); (ii) lower balances of the non-euro area ancillary systems connected
to TARGET through the TARGET-ECB component (see note 10 “Liabilities to non-
euro area residents denominated in euro”); and (iii) the decrease in cash received as
collateral against the lending of PSPP and public sector PEPP securities (see note 8
“Other liabilities to euro area credit institutions denominated in euro” and note 10
“Liabilities to non-euro area residents denominated in euro”). The impact of these
factors was partially offset mainly by the cash inflows as a result of the maturing of
securities under the APP and the PEPP, which were settled via TARGET accounts
(see note 4 “Securities of euro area residents denominated in euro”).
The remuneration of TARGET positions held by euro area NCBs vis-à-vis the ECB,
with the exception of balances arising from back-to-back swap transactions in
connection with US dollar liquidity-providing operations, is calculated daily at the
latest available interest rate used by the Eurosystem in its tenders for main
refinancing operations.
Other liabilities within the Eurosystem comprised predominantly deposits accepted
by the ECB in its role as fiscal agent for the European Commission, relating to the
administration of EU borrowing and lending activities (see note 21 “Administration of
borrowing and lending operations”).
Note 13 - Other liabilities
Note 13.1 - Off-balance-sheet instruments revaluation differences
This item is composed primarily of valuation changes in swap and forward
transactions in foreign currency that were outstanding on 31 December 2023 (see
note 20 “Foreign exchange swap and forward transactions”). These valuation
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 58
changes amounted to €68 million (2022: €430 million) and are the result of the
conversion of such transactions into their euro equivalents at the exchange rates
prevailing on the balance sheet date, compared with the euro values resulting from
the conversion of the transactions at the average cost of the respective foreign
currency on that date (see “Off-balance-sheet instruments” and “Gold and foreign
currency assets and liabilities” in Section 2.3 “Accounting policies”).
Note 13.2 - Accruals and income collected in advance
This item comprised the following components:
2023 2022 Change
€ millions € millions € millions
Accrued interest on TARGET balances due to NCBs 6,390 3,530 2,860
Accrued interest on NCBs’ claims in respect of foreign reserves
transferred to the ECB 1,335 201 1,133
Accrued interest on deposits accepted by the ECB in its role as fiscal
agent 172 94 78
Other accruals and deferred income 134 90 43
Total 8,030 3,915 4,114
As at 31 December 2023 the two main components under this heading were accrued
interest payable on TARGET balances due to NCBs for December 2023 (see note
10 “Liabilities to non-euro area residents denominated in euro” and note 12.2 “Other
liabilities within the Eurosystem (net)”) and accrued interest payable to euro area
NCBs for 2023 in respect of their claims relating to foreign reserves transferred to
the ECB (see note 12.1 “Liabilities equivalent to the transfer of foreign reserves”).
These amounts were settled in January 2024.
This item also included accrued interest payable on deposits accepted by the ECB in
its role as fiscal agent (see note 9.1 “General government”, note 10 “Liabilities to
non-euro area residents denominated in euro” and note 12.2 “Other liabilities within
the Eurosystem (net)”).
The remainder of this item included mainly (i) accrued interest payable on balances
of the euro area ancillary systems connected to TARGET through the TARGET-ECB
component (see note 9.2 “Other liabilities”); (ii) miscellaneous accruals and deferred
income; and (iii) accrued interest payable on cash received as collateral in the
context of the ECB’s securities lending operations (note 8 “Other liabilities to euro
area credit institutions denominated in euro” and note 10 “Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in euro”).
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 59
Note 13.3 - Sundry
On 31 December 2023 this item stood at €1,401 million (2022: €1,562 million). It
included balances amounting to €635 million (2022: €974 million) related to swap
and forward transactions in foreign currency that were outstanding on 31 December
2023 (see note 20 “Foreign exchange swap and forward transactions”). These
balances arose from the conversion of such transactions into their euro equivalents
at the respective currency’s average cost on the balance sheet date, compared with
the euro values at which the transactions were initially recorded (see “Off-balance-
sheet instruments” in Section 2.3 “Accounting policies”).
The item also includes a lease liability of €117 million (2022: €141 million) (see
“Leases” in Section 2.3 “Accounting policies”).
In addition, this item includes the ECB’s net defined benefit liability in respect of the
post-employment and other long-term benefits of its staff45 and the members of the
Executive Board, as well as the members of the Supervisory Board employed by the
ECB. The termination benefits of ECB staff are also included.
The ECB’s post-employment benefits, other long-term benefits and
termination benefits
Balance sheet
The amounts recognised in the balance sheet under the item “Sundry” (liabilities) in
respect of post-employment, other long-term and staff termination benefits46 were as
follows:
2023 2022
€ millions € millions
Staff Boards Total Staff Boards Total
Defined benefit obligation 2,458 35 2,493 1,947 31 1,978
Fair value of plan assets (1,983) - (1,983) (1,638) - (1,638)
Net defined benefit liability included under
“Sundry” (liabilities) 475 35 510 309 31 340
Note: The columns labelled “Boards” report amounts in respect of both the Executive Board and the Supervisory Board.
In 2023 the present value of the defined benefit obligation vis-à-vis staff of €2,458
million (2022: €1,947 million) included unfunded benefits amounting to €278 million
(2022: €233 million) relating to post-employment benefits other than pensions and to
other long-term benefits. The present value of the defined benefit obligation vis-à-vis
the members of the Executive Board and the members of the Supervisory Board of
45 The defined benefit pillar of the plan reflects only the compulsory contributions made by the ECB and
staff. Voluntary contributions made by staff in a defined contribution pillar in 2023 amounted to €228
million (2022: €189 million). These contributions are invested in the plan assets and give rise to a
corresponding obligation of equal value.
46 All remaining termination benefits related to the temporary Career Transition Support scheme
introduced by the ECB in 2017 were paid during 2023 and therefore the ECB had no related liabilities
as at 31 December 2023.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 60
€35 million (2022: €31 million) relates solely to unfunded arrangements in place for
post-employment and other long-term benefits.
Remeasurements of the ECB’s net defined benefit liability in respect of post-
employment benefits are recognised in the balance sheet under the liability item
“Revaluation accounts”. In 2023 remeasurement gains under that liability item
amounted to €238 million (2022: €369 million) (see note 15 “Revaluation accounts”).
Changes in the defined benefit obligation, plan assets and remeasurement
results
Changes in the present value of the defined benefit obligation were as follows:
2023 2022
€ millions € millions
Staff Boards Total Staff Boards Total
Opening defined benefit obligation 1,947 31 1,978 3,165 43 3,209
Current service cost 101 2 103 164 4 168
Interest cost on the obligation 77 1 79 42 1 42
Contributions paid by plan participants1 36 0 36 40 0 41
Benefits paid (30) (3) (33) (38) (2) (40)
Remeasurement (gains)/losses 327 4 331 (1,426) (16) (1,441)
Closing defined benefit obligation 2,458 35 2,493 1,947 31 1,978
Note: The columns labelled “Boards” report amounts in respect of both the Executive Board and the Supervisory Board.
1) Net figure including compulsory contributions and transfers into/out of the plans. The compulsory contributions paid by staff are
7.4%, whilst those paid by the ECB are 20.7% of the basic salary.
The total remeasurement losses of €331 million on the defined benefit obligation in
2023 arose mainly as a result of the decrease in the discount rate used for the
actuarial valuation from 3.9% in 2022 to 3.4% in 2023.
Changes in the fair value of plan assets in the defined benefit pillar relating to staff
were as follows:
2023 2022
€ millions € millions
Opening fair value of plan assets 1,638 1,749
Interest income on plan assets 66 23
Remeasurement gains/(losses) 189 (228)
Contributions paid by employer 75 71
Contributions paid by plan participants 36 40
Benefits paid (20) (18)
Closing fair value of plan assets 1,983 1,638
The remeasurement gains on plan assets in 2023 reflected the fact that the actual
return on the fund units was higher than the assumed interest income on plan
assets, which was based on the discount rate assumption of 3.9%.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 61
Changes in the remeasurement results were as follows:
2023 2022
€ millions € millions
Opening remeasurement gains/(losses) 369 (799)
Contributions by NCBs joining the Eurosystem1 3 -
Gains/(losses) on plan assets 189 (228)
Gains/(losses) on obligation (331) 1,441
(Gains)/losses recognised in the profit and loss account 8 (45)
Closing remeasurement gains included under “Revaluation accounts” 238 369
1) Upon the adoption of the single currency by Croatia, Hrvatska narodna banka contributed to the balances of all the revaluation
accounts of the ECB as at 31 December 2022, which also included the remeasurement gains outstanding as of that date.
Profit and loss account
The amounts recognised in the profit and loss account were as follows:
2023 2022
€ millions € millions
Staff Boards Total Staff Boards Total
Current service cost 101 2 103 164 4 168
Net interest on the net defined benefit liability 12 1 13 19 1 19
Interest cost on the obligation 77 1 79 42 1 42
Interest income on plan assets (66) - (66) (23) - (23)
Remeasurement (gains)/losses on other
long-term and termination benefits 8 (0) 8 (44) (0) (45)
Total included in “Staff costs” 121 3 124 138 5 142
Note: The columns labelled “Boards” report amounts in respect of both the Executive Board and the Supervisory Board.
The amounts recognised in the profit and loss account for the current service cost,
interest cost on the obligation and interest income on plan assets are estimated
using the rates that applied in the preceding year. The discount rate used for the
actuarial valuation rose from 1.3% in 2021 to 3.9% in 2022, resulting in 2023 in (i)
lower current service cost, (ii) higher interest cost on the obligation, and (iii) higher
interest income on plan assets.
The remeasurements on other long-term and termination benefits are recognised in
the profit and loss account of the current year, reflecting the rates applicable to the
valuation. Therefore, the lower discount rate of 3.4% used for the actuarial valuation
at the end of 2023 resulted in a remeasurement loss recognised in that year.
Key assumptions
In preparing the valuations referred to in this note, the independent actuaries have
used assumptions which the Executive Board has accepted for the purposes of
accounting and disclosure. The principal assumptions used for the purposes of
calculating the liability for post-employment benefits and other long-term benefits
were as follows:
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 62
2023 2022
% %
Discount rate 3.40 3.90
Expected return on plan assets1 5.30 4.90
General future salary increases2 2.00 2.00
Future pension increases3 1.70 1.70
1) These assumptions were used for calculating the part of the ECB’s defined benefit obligation which is funded by assets with an
underlying capital guarantee.
2) In addition, allowance is made for prospective individual salary increases of up to 1.8% per annum, depending on the age of the
plan participants.
3) In accordance with the ECB’s pension plan rules, pensions will be increased annually. If general salary adjustments for ECB
employees are below price inflation, any increase in pensions will be in line with the general salary adjustments. If the general salary
adjustments exceed price inflation, they will be applied to determine the increase in pensions, provided that the financial position of the
ECB’s pension plans permits such an increase.
Note 14 - Provisions
As at 31 December 2023 this item included administrative provisions amounting to
€67 million (2022: €69 million). At the end of 2022 this item also included a provision
for financial risks amounting to €6,566 million. Upon Croatia’s adoption of the single
currency, Hrvatska narodna banka contributed €53 million to this provision with effect
from 1 January 202347, increasing its size to €6,620 million.
The size of and continuing requirement for the provision for financial risks is
reviewed annually, based on the ECB’s assessment of its exposure to these risks
and taking a range of factors into account. Its size, together with any amount held in
the general reserve fund, may not exceed the value of the ECB’s capital paid up by
the euro area NCBs. The purpose of this provision is to be used to the extent
deemed necessary by the Governing Council to offset losses that arise as a result of
exposures to financial risks. At the end of 2023 this provision was released in full to
cover losses that arose from exposures to financial risks, bringing the ECB’s loss for
the year to €1,266 million. The losses resulted mainly from the increase in the
interest rate used by the Eurosystem in its tenders for main refinancing operations,
which led to a significant interest expense arising from the ECB’s net TARGET
liability (see note 23.4 “Other interest income; and other interest expense”).
As a result of the full release of this provision for financial risks, its size stood at zero
as at 31 December 2023. The Governing Council, in the context of its annual review,
may decide to replenish this provision, once the ECB returns to making a profit.
Note 15 - Revaluation accounts
This item consists mainly of revaluation balances arising from unrealised gains on
assets, liabilities and off-balance-sheet instruments (see “Income recognition”, “Gold
and foreign currency assets and liabilities”, “Securities” and “Off-balance-sheet
instruments” in Section 2.3 “Accounting policies”). It also includes remeasurements
47 This contribution was paid in accordance with Article 48.2 of the Statute of the ESCB.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 63
of the ECB’s net defined benefit liability in respect of post-employment benefits (see
“The ECB’s post-employment benefits, other long-term benefits and termination
benefits” in Section 2.3 “Accounting policies” and note 13.3 “Sundry”).
2023 2022 Change
€ millions € millions € millions
Gold 26,622 23,794 2,827
Foreign currency 9,842 12,305 (2,462)
US dollars 9,624 11,225 (1,601)
Japanese yen 206 977 (771)
Chinese renminbi 9 47 (38)
SDR 4 56 (52)
Others 0 - 0
Securities and other instruments 397 19 378
Net defined benefit liability in respect of post-employment benefits 238 369 (131)
Total 37,099 36,487 611
The revaluation accounts increased in 2023 predominantly due to the rise in the
market price of gold in euro terms. Additionally, upon Croatia’s adoption of the single
currency, Hrvatska narodna banka contributed €296 million to these balances with
effect from 1 January 2023. This increase was partially offset by a decrease in the
size of the foreign currency revaluation accounts, mainly owing to the depreciation of
the US dollar and the Japanese yen against the euro.
The foreign exchange rates used for the year-end revaluation were as follows:
Exchange rates 2023 2022
US dollar per euro 1.1050 1.0666
Japanese yen per euro 156.33 140.66
Chinese renminbi per euro 7.8509 7.3582
Euro per SDR 1.2157 1.2517
Euro per fine ounce of gold 1,867.828 1,706.075
Note 16 - Capital and reserves
Note 16.1 - Capital
The subscribed capital of the ECB is €10,825 million.
Croatia adopted the single currency on 1 January 2023. In accordance with Article
48.1 of the Statute of the ESCB, Hrvatska narodna banka paid up €69 million as at 1
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 64
January 202348, representing the remainder of its capital subscription to the ECB. As
a consequence, the ECB’s total paid-up capital increased from €8,880 million on 31
December 2022 to €8,948 million on 1 January 2023, as shown in the table below.
Since 1 January 2023 As at 31 December 2022
Capital Subscribed Paid-up Capital Subscribed Paid-up
key capital capital key capital capital
% € millions € millions % € millions € millions
Nationale Bank van België/
Banque Nationale de Belgique (Belgium) 2.9630 321 321 2.9630 321 321
Deutsche Bundesbank (Germany) 21.4394 2,321 2,321 21.4394 2,321 2,321
Eesti Pank (Estonia) 0.2291 25 25 0.2291 25 25
Central Bank of Ireland (Ireland) 1.3772 149 149 1.3772 149 149
Bank of Greece (Greece) 2.0117 218 218 2.0117 218 218
Banco de España (Spain) 9.6981 1,050 1,050 9.6981 1,050 1,050
Banque de France (France) 16.6108 1,798 1,798 16.6108 1,798 1,798
Hrvatska narodna banka (Croatia) 0.6595 71 71 - - -
Banca d’Italia (Italy) 13.8165 1,496 1,496 13.8165 1,496 1,496
Central Bank of Cyprus (Cyprus) 0.1750 19 19 0.1750 19 19
Latvijas Banka (Latvia) 0.3169 34 34 0.3169 34 34
Lietuvos bankas (Lithuania) 0.4707 51 51 0.4707 51 51
Banque centrale du Luxembourg (Luxembourg) 0.2679 29 29 0.2679 29 29
Central Bank of Malta (Malta) 0.0853 9 9 0.0853 9 9
De Nederlandsche Bank
(The Netherlands) 4.7662 516 516 4.7662 516 516
Oesterreichische Nationalbank (Austria) 2.3804 258 258 2.3804 258 258
Banco de Portugal (Portugal) 1.9035 206 206 1.9035 206 206
Banka Slovenije (Slovenia) 0.3916 42 42 0.3916 42 42
Národná banka Slovenska (Slovakia) 0.9314 101 101 0.9314 101 101
Suomen Pankki – Finlands Bank (Finland) 1.4939 162 162 1.4939 162 162
Subtotal for euro area NCBs 81.9881 8,875 8,875 81.3286 8,804 8,804
Българска народна банка
(Bulgarian National Bank) (Bulgaria) 0.9832 106 4 0.9832 106 4
Česká národní banka (Czech Republic) 1.8794 203 8 1.8794 203 8
Danmarks Nationalbank (Denmark) 1.7591 190 7 1.7591 190 7
Hrvatska narodna banka (Croatia) - - - 0.6595 71 3
Magyar Nemzeti Bank (Hungary) 1.5488 168 6 1.5488 168 6
Narodowy Bank Polski (Poland) 6.0335 653 24 6.0335 653 24
Banca Naţională a României (Romania) 2.8289 306 11 2.8289 306 11
Sveriges Riksbank (Sweden) 2.9790 322 12 2.9790 322 12
Subtotal for non-euro area NCBs 18.0119 1,950 73 18.6714 2,021 76
Total 100.0000 10,825 8,948 100.0000 10,825 8,880
48 Decision (EU) 2023/135 of the ECB of 30 December 2022 on the paying-up of capital, transfer of
foreign reserve assets and contributions by Hrvatska narodna banka to the European Central Bank's
reserves and provisions (ECB/2022/51) (OJ L 17, 19.1.2023, p. 94).
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 65
The euro area NCBs have fully paid up their share of subscribed capital.
The non-euro area NCBs are required to pay up 3.75% of their subscribed capital as
a contribution to the operational costs of the ECB. Non-euro area NCBs are not
entitled to receive any share of the distributable profits of the ECB, nor are they liable
to cover any loss of the ECB.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 66
2.5 Off-balance-sheet instruments
Note 17 - Securities lending programmes
As part of the management of the ECB’s own funds, the ECB has a securities
lending programme agreement in place under which a specialised institution enters
into securities lending transactions on behalf of the ECB.
In addition, in accordance with the Governing Council’s decisions, the ECB has
made available for lending securities held for monetary policy purposes.49
Unless these securities lending operations are conducted against cash collateral that
remains uninvested at the end of the year, they are recorded in off-balance-sheet
accounts.50 Such securities lending operations with a value of €32,791 million (2022:
€11,569 million) were outstanding as at 31 December 2023. Of this amount, €26,577
million (2022: €6,637 million) related to the lending of securities held for monetary
policy purposes.
Note 18 - Interest rate futures
The following transactions, presented at year-end foreign exchange rates, were
outstanding:
2023 2022
Contract value Contract value Change
Foreign currency interest rate futures € millions € millions € millions
Purchases 2,207 692 1,515
Sales 4,142 1,401 2,741
These transactions were conducted in the context of the management of the ECB’s
foreign reserves.
Note 19 - Forward transactions in securities
The following transactions, presented at year-end foreign exchange rates, were
outstanding:
49 Further details on securities lending can be found on the ECB’s website.
50 If cash collateral remains uninvested at the year-end, these transactions are recorded in on-balance-
sheet accounts (see note 8 “Other liabilities to euro area credit institutions denominated in euro” and
note 10 “Liabilities to non-euro area residents denominated in euro”).
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 67
2023 2022 Change
Forward transactions in securities € millions € millions € millions
Purchases 45 - 45
Sales 45 - 45
These transactions were conducted in the context of the management of the ECB’s
foreign reserves.
Note 20 - Foreign exchange swap and forward transactions
Management of foreign reserves
Foreign exchange swap and forward transactions were conducted in the context of
the management of the ECB’s foreign reserves. The outstanding claims and
liabilities resulting from these transactions, presented at year-end foreign exchange
rates, were as follows:
2023 2022 Change
Foreign exchange swap and forward transactions € millions € millions € millions
Claims 2,778 3,269 (491)
Liabilities 2,901 3,541 (639)
Liquidity-providing swap arrangements
The ECB is part of a swap-line network of central banks and has in place reciprocal
swap arrangements with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank of
Japan, the Federal Reserve System and the Swiss National Bank. It also holds a
reciprocal swap-line with the People’s Bank of China. These swap arrangements
allow for the provision of (i) liquidity in any of the respective currencies of the above-
mentioned central banks to euro area banks; or (ii) euro liquidity to financial
institutions in the jurisdictions of the above central banks. Furthermore, swap
agreements are also in place with Danmarks Nationalbank, Narodowy Bank Polski
and Sveriges Riksbank for the provision of euro liquidity to financial institutions in
their jurisdictions. The above arrangements are aimed at addressing possible
liquidity needs to counter potential market dysfunction and thereby minimise the risk
of adverse spillover effects to euro area financial markets and economies.51
US dollar-denominated claims and liabilities with a maturity date in 2024 arose in
connection with the provision of US dollar liquidity to Eurosystem counterparties (see
note 10 “Liabilities to non-euro area residents denominated in euro”).
51 Further details on liquidity-providing swap arrangements can be found on the ECB’s website.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 68
Note 21 - Administration of borrowing and lending operations
In 2023 the ECB continued to be responsible for the administration of accounts and
processing of payments relating to the borrowing and lending operations of the EU
under the medium-term financial assistance facility, the European Financial
Stabilisation Mechanism and the loan facility agreement for Greece.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the EU granted loans to the Member States
under its instrument for temporary Support to mitigate Unemployment Risks in an
Emergency (SURE). The availability of this instrument ended on 31 December 2022,
but the relevant issuances consisted of bonds ranging from 5 to 30 years maturity. In
2023 the EU also continued to provide financing in the form of non-repayable
financial support and loan support to Member States under the Next Generation EU
(NGEU) programme, which was established to support the economic recovery in the
EU, while facilitating the green and digital transition of the Union’s economy. In 2023
the EU also provided support to Ukraine in the form of loans through a new macro-
financial assistance instrument (MFA +). The ECB supported the European
Commission in the administration of the operations related to the above-mentioned
instruments.
In 2023 the ECB processed payments related to all the above-mentioned operations.
Note 22 - Contingent liabilities from pending lawsuits
Lawsuits have been filed against the ECB relating to the exercise of its supervisory
functions over Banca Carige S.p.A. (Banca Carige). In one of these lawsuits, Banca
Carige’s shareholders are seeking financial compensation from the ECB for the harm
allegedly sustained as a result of various actions by the ECB in the exercise of its
supervisory functions in respect of Banca Carige, consisting both of alleged failures
to act and harmful actions. This case will be decided taking into account, among
other factors, the final outcome of other related cases. In one of them, the General
Court of the EU deemed, in its judgment of 12 October 2022, that the ECB’s decision
to place Banca Carige under temporary administration lacked an appropriate legal
basis under Italian law. Accordingly, the General Court annulled the ECB’s decision
to place Banca Carige under temporary administration as well as the first extension
of the duration of temporary administration in 2019. However, the General Court’s
judgment was appealed by the ECB before the Court of Justice of the EU, which
may still overturn that judgment. Moreover, two further ECB decisions extending the
temporary administration are currently being contested in an action for annulment,
which is still pending.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 69
2.6 Notes on the profit and loss account
Note 23 - Net interest income
2023 2022 Change
€ millions € millions € millions
Net interest income on foreign reserve assets 2,382 798 1,583
Interest income arising from the allocation of euro banknotes within the
Eurosystem 4,817 736 4,081
Remuneration of NCBs’ claims in respect of foreign reserves
transferred (1,335) (201) (1,133)
Net other interest expense (13,057) (433) (12,624)
Net interest income (7,193) 900 (8,093)
Note 23.1 - Interest income on foreign reserve assets
This item includes interest income, net of interest expense, in respect of the ECB’s
net foreign reserve assets.
The net interest income/expense per instrument type is shown below:
2023 2022 Change
€ millions € millions € millions
Current accounts 82 22 60
Money market deposits 129 51 78
Repurchase agreements - (0) 0
Reverse repurchase agreements 271 148 122
Securities 1,745 513 1,232
Forward and swap transactions in foreign currencies 155 64 91
Net interest income on foreign reserve assets 2,382 798 1,583
The net interest income/expense per foreign currency was as follows:
2023 2022 Change
€ millions € millions € millions
US dollars 2,298 771 1,527
Japanese yen (2) (4) 2
Chinese renminbi 13 14 (0)
SDR 73 18 54
Net interest income on foreign reserve assets 2,382 798 1,583
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 70
Note 23.2 - Interest income arising from the allocation of euro
banknotes within the Eurosystem
This item consists of the interest income relating to the ECB’s 8% share of the total
euro banknote issue (see “Banknotes in circulation” in Section 2.3 “Accounting
policies” and note 5.1 “Claims related to the allocation of euro banknotes within the
Eurosystem”). The interest income in 2023 amounted to €4,817 million (2022: €736
million). The increase in this income resulted from the higher average rate on the
main refinancing operations in 2023 compared with the previous year (3.8% in 2023,
compared with 0.6% in 2022).
Note 23.3 - Remuneration of NCBs’ claims in respect of foreign
reserves transferred
Remuneration paid to euro area NCBs on their claims in respect of the foreign
reserve assets transferred to the ECB (see note 12.1 “Liabilities equivalent to the
transfer of foreign reserves”) is disclosed under this heading. The interest expense in
2023 amounted to €1,335 million (2022: €201 million). The increase in this
remuneration was due to the higher average rate on the main refinancing operations
in 2023 compared with the previous year (3.8% in 2023, compared with 0.6% in
2022).
Note 23.4 - Other interest income; and other interest expense
Other interest income and other interest expense were as follows:
2023 2022 Change
€ millions € millions € millions
Net interest expense arising from TARGET balances due from/to NCBs (14,236) (2,075) (12,161)
Net interest income/(expense) on monetary policy securities 3,467 1,534 1,933
CBPP1 and CBPP2 - 2 (2)
SMP1 49 65 (16)
CBPP3 179 120 59
ABSPP 642 140 502
PSPP 1,997 1,310 686
PEPP 600 (103) 703
Net interest income/(expense) on monetary policy security lending2 (308) 80 (388)
Net interest income on own funds 627 57 571
Net interest expense on deposits accepted by the ECB in its role as
fiscal agent (1,953) (150) (1,803)
Net interest income/(expense) on other assets/liabilities (655) 121 (776)
Net other interest expense (13,057) (433) (12,624)
1) The ECB’s net interest income on SMP holdings of Greek government bonds amounted to €31 million (2022: €43 million).
2) Net interest income/(expense) on monetary policy security lending also includes the interest income/(expense) on cash received as
collateral.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 71
Note 24 - Realised gains/losses arising from financial operations
Realised gains and losses arising from financial operations were as follows:
2023 2022 Change
€ millions € millions € millions
Net realised price losses (117) (351) 234
Net realised exchange rate and gold price gains 11 241 (230)
Net realised losses arising from financial operations (106) (110) 4
Net realised price losses include realised gains and losses on securities and interest
rate futures. The net realised price losses in 2023 mainly arose from the accounting
treatment of premium and discount amortisation related to repayments of securities
held in the ABSPP.52
Realised gains and losses arising from financial operations per currency and per
quarter are shown below:
2023 2022
€ millions € millions
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Total Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Total
Net realised price gains/(losses)
US dollars 41 22 (64) (20) (21) (9) (87) (76) (88) (260)
Japanese yen (5) 4 (1) (4) (5) (1) (3) 1 (2) (4)
Chinese renminbi 0 0 0 (0) 0 2 2 2 0 6
Euro (42) (21) (16) (12) (91) (34) (40) (9) (9) (92)
Subtotal (5) 4 (81) (35) (117) (42) (128) (82) (99) (351)
Net realised exchange rate and gold price gains/(losses)
US dollars 0 2 1 5 8 9 20 15 192 236
Japanese yen 2 0 0 0 2 1 1 0 3 4
Chinese renminbi 0 (0) 0 (0) 0 0 0 0 0 0
Other 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 (0) 0 0
Subtotal 2 3 1 5 11 10 21 15 195 241
Total (3) 7 (80) (30) (106) (32) (107) (67) 96 (110)
52 Where the actual repayment date differs from the legal maturity date (which is usually the case for the
ABSPP), the amount of the premium or discount that has not yet been amortised is considered realised
in proportion to the value of the principal repaid.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 72
Note 25 - Write-downs on financial assets and positions
Write-downs on financial assets and positions were as follows:
2023 2022 Change
€ millions € millions € millions
Unrealised price losses on securities (38) (1,840) 1,802
Unrealised exchange rate losses - (0) 0
Write-downs on financial assets and positions (38) (1,840) 1,802
The market value of a number of securities held in the US dollar and own funds
portfolios declined, alongside an increase in the corresponding yields in 2023. This
resulted in unrealised price losses at the year-end. In 2022 these losses were
substantially higher, because the corresponding yields had increased significantly,
resulting in a large reduction in the market value of the majority of securities held in
these portfolios at the end of that year.
Note 26 - Net income/expense from fees and commissions
2023 2022 Change
€ millions € millions € millions
Income from fees and commissions 672 606 66
Expenses relating to fees and commissions (22) (21) (1)
Net income from fees and commissions 650 585 65
Income under this heading consists primarily of supervisory fees. Expenses
comprise predominantly custody fees.
Income and expenses related to supervisory tasks
Banking supervision-related income mainly comprises supervisory fee income. The
ECB levies annual fees on supervised entities in order to recover expenditure
incurred in the performance of its supervisory tasks. Based on the ECB’s actual
annual expenses incurred in the performance of its banking supervision tasks, the
supervisory fee income for 2023 stood at €654 million (2022: €594 million).
In order to determine the amount of supervisory fees to be levied, the actual annual
expenditure is adjusted for amounts reimbursed to/received from individual banks for
previous fee periods and other adjustments, including interest received on late
payments.53 Taking into account an adjustment corresponding to interest received on
late payments as well as net reimbursements to individual banks for previous fee
53 See Article 5(3) of Regulation (EU) No 1163/2014 of the ECB of 22 October 2014 on supervisory fees
(ECB/2014/41) (OJ L 311, 31.10.2014, p. 23), as amended. The unofficial consolidated text with the list
of amendments can be found here.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 73
periods, the annual supervisory fees to be levied on the supervised entities for the
fee period 2023 correspond to an amount almost equal to the actual annual
expenses of €654 million54 (see note 6.4 “Accruals and prepaid expenses”). The
individual supervisory fees will be invoiced in the second quarter of 2024.55
The ECB is also entitled to impose administrative penalties on supervised entities for
failure to comply with applicable EU banking law on prudential requirements
(including ECB supervisory decisions). The related income is not considered in the
calculation of the annual supervisory fees, nor are reimbursements of such penalties
in the event that previous sanction decisions are amended or annulled. Instead, the
related amounts are recorded in the ECB’s profit and loss account. In 2023 the
income arising from penalties on supervised entities amounted to €18 million (2022:
€12 million).
Thus, the income of the ECB for supervisory tasks was as follows:
2023 2022 Change
€ millions € millions € millions
Income from supervisory fees 654 594 60
Fee income from significant entities or significant groups 626 567 59
Fee income from less significant entities or less significant groups 27 27 0
Imposed administrative penalties 18 12 6
Income related to banking supervision tasks 671 606 65
Banking supervision-related expenses result from the direct supervision of significant
entities, the oversight of the supervision of less significant entities and the
performance of horizontal tasks and specialised services. They consist of the direct
expenses of the ECB’s supervisory function and the relevant expenses arising from
support areas needed to fulfil the ECB’s supervisory responsibilities, reflecting their
services in relation to premises and facilities; human resources; information
technology (IT); legal, audit and administration; communication and translation; as
well as other activities.
The actual expenses relating to the ECB’s supervisory tasks, which are recovered
via the annual supervisory fees for 2023, amounted to €654 million (2022: €594
million). The overall increase was driven by higher staff costs in 2023. In the
previous year, the staff costs were lessened by actuarial gains considered in relation
to other long-term benefits owing to the significantly higher discount rate used for the
actuarial valuation at the end of 202256. In 2023 the higher average number of staff
working for ECB Banking Supervision as well as salary adjustments also contributed
to the rise in staff costs. Besides the higher staff costs, the return to full levels of
54 The ECB decision on the total amount of annual supervisory fees for 2023 will be adopted and
subsequently published in mid-March 2024.
55 Further details can be found on the ECB’s banking supervision website.
56 The discount rate used for the actuarial valuation at the end of 2022 was 3.9%, as compared to 1.3% in
2021.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 74
activity in banking supervision following the pandemic also contributed to the overall
increase in expenses relating to supervisory tasks.
Note 27 - Income from equity shares and participating interests
The dividend of €1 million in 2023 (2022: €1 million) received on shares which the
ECB holds in the BIS (see note 6.2 “Other financial assets”) is shown under this
heading.
Note 28 - Other income
Other miscellaneous income in 2023 stood at €72 million (2022: €61 million) and
arose mainly from contributions of participating NCBs to costs incurred by the ECB in
connection with ESCB projects and services in operation.
Note 29 - Staff costs
Staff costs were as follows:
2023 2022 Change
€ millions € millions € millions
Salaries and allowances1 528 487 41
Staff insurance 25 23 2
Post-employment, other long-term and termination benefits 124 142 (19)
Staff costs 676 652 25
1) Salaries and allowances are, in essence, modelled on, and comparable with, the remuneration scheme of the EU.
The average number of employees, expressed in full-time equivalents (FTEs)57,
amounted to 4,222 (2022: 4,136), of which 380 were managerial staff (2022: 373).
Salaries and allowances increased as a result of the higher average number of staff
employed by the ECB, predominantly in banking supervision, as well as the salary
adjustments. This increase was partially offset by lower costs in relation to post-
employment benefits, resulting mainly from a higher discount rate used in the
actuarial valuation to derive the current service cost for 202358 (see note 13.3
“Sundry”).
Remuneration of the Executive and Supervisory Boards
Members of the Executive Board and the members of the Supervisory Board
employed by the ECB receive a basic salary and a residence allowance. In the case
57 A full-time equivalent (FTE) is a unit equivalent to one employee working full-time for one year. Staff
with permanent, fixed or short-term contracts and participants in the ECB’s Graduate Programme are
included in proportion to their hours worked. Staff on maternity or long-term leave are also included,
while staff on unpaid leave are excluded.
58 The current service cost is estimated using the rates that applied in the preceding year.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 75
of the President, a residence is provided in lieu of a residence allowance. Members
of the Executive Board and the Chair of the Supervisory Board also receive a
representation allowance. Subject to the Conditions of Employment for Staff of the
European Central Bank, members of both boards may be entitled to household,
child, education and other allowances, depending on their individual circumstances.
Salaries are subject to a tax for the benefit of the EU, as well as to deductions in
respect of contributions to the pension, medical, long-term care and accident
insurance schemes. Allowances are non-taxable and non-pensionable.
In 2023 the basic salaries of the members of the Executive Board and members of
the Supervisory Board employed by the ECB (i.e. excluding representatives of
national supervisors) were as follows:59
2023 2022
€ €
Christine Lagarde (President) 444,984 427,560
Luis de Guindos Jurado (Vice-President) 381,444 366,504
Philip R. Lane (Board Member) 317,856 305,400
Fabio Panetta (Board Member until 31 October 2023) 264,880 305,400
Isabel Schnabel (Board Member) 317,856 305,400
Frank Elderson (Board Member) 317,856 305,400
Piero Cipollone (Board Member since 1 November 2023) 52,976 -
Total Executive Board 2,097,852 2,015,664
Total Supervisory Board (members employed by the ECB)1 1,374,853 1,225,887
of which:
Andrea Enria (Chair of the Supervisory Board) 317,856 305,400
Total 3,472,705 3,241,551
1) The total figure includes the remuneration of the Chair of the Supervisory Board and of four ECB representatives. Frank Elderson
does not receive any additional remuneration in his role as Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board. The totals for 2022 were affected by a
time gap between the end and start, respectively, of the terms of office of Pentti Hakkarainen and his successor Anneli Tuominen,
whereas in 2023 all ECB members of the Supervisory Board were in office throughout the year.
Total allowances paid to members of both boards and the ECB’s contributions to
medical, long-term care and accident insurance schemes on their behalf amounted
to €1,169,703 (2022: €1,110,618).
Transitional payments may be made to former members of both boards for a limited
period after the end of their terms of office. In 2023 these payments, the related
allowances and the ECB’s contributions to the medical, long-term care and accident
insurance schemes of former members of both boards amounted to €365,864 (2022:
€742,892). The decrease in these payments was mainly due to fewer former board
members being in receipt of them in 2023 compared with 2022.
Pension-related payments, including post-employment allowances, and contributions
to the medical, long-term care and accident insurance schemes for former board
59 Amounts are presented gross, i.e. before any tax deductions for the benefit of the EU.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 76
members and their dependants amounted to €2,670,313 (2022: €1,095,737)60. In
2023 this amount included a lump sum payment on retirement to a former board
member in lieu of future pension payments.
Note 30 - Administrative expenses
Administrative expenses were as follows:
2023 2022 Change
€ millions € millions € millions
Rent, property maintenance and utilities 52 54 (2)
Staff-related expenses 67 60 7
IT-related expenses 137 138 (2)
External services 161 151 10
Other expenses 64 57 7
Administrative expenses 481 460 20
The overall increase in administrative expenses in 2023 was mainly due to (i) higher
expenses for external consultancy support in relation to IT maintenance activities
and Eurosystem projects (“External services”); (ii) the return to full levels of activity
following the pandemic, in particular in banking supervision; and (iii) the impact of
inflation. The last two drivers affected various expenses recorded under this item.
Note 31 - Banknote production services
In 2023 this expense amounted to €9 million (2022: €9 million). It arose
predominantly from the cross-border transportation of euro banknotes between
banknote printing works and NCBs, for the delivery of new banknotes, and between
NCBs, for the compensation of shortages with surplus stocks. These costs are borne
centrally by the ECB.
60 These pension-related payments decreased the defined benefit obligation recognised in the balance
sheet. For the net amount charged to the profit and loss account in relation to the pension
arrangements for current members of the Executive Board and current members of the Supervisory
Board employed by the ECB, see note 13.3 “Sundry”.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 77
2.7 Post-balance-sheet events
Note 32 - Five-yearly adjustment of the ECB’s capital key
Pursuant to Article 29 of the Statute of the ESCB, the weightings assigned to the
NCBs in the key for subscription to the ECB’s capital are adjusted every five years61.
The fifth such adjustment following the establishment of the ECB was made on 1
January 2024, as follows:
Capital key since Capital key as at
1 January 2024 31 December 2023
% %
Nationale Bank van België/Banque Nationale de Belgique (Belgium) 3.0005 2.9630
Deutsche Bundesbank (Germany) 21.7749 21.4394
Eesti Pank (Estonia) 0.2437 0.2291
Central Bank of Ireland (Ireland) 1.7811 1.3772
Bank of Greece (Greece) 1.8474 2.0117
Banco de España (Spain) 9.6690 9.6981
Banque de France (France) 16.3575 16.6108
Hrvatska narodna banka (Croatia) 0.6329 0.6595
Banca d’Italia (Italy) 13.0993 13.8165
Central Bank of Cyprus (Cyprus) 0.1802 0.1750
Latvijas Banka (Latvia) 0.3169 0.3169
Lietuvos bankas (Lithuania) 0.4826 0.4707
Banque centrale du Luxembourg (Luxembourg) 0.2976 0.2679
Central Bank of Malta (Malta) 0.1053 0.0853
De Nederlandsche Bank (The Netherlands) 4.8306 4.7662
Oesterreichische Nationalbank (Austria) 2.4175 2.3804
Banco de Portugal (Portugal) 1.9014 1.9035
Banka Slovenije (Slovenia) 0.4041 0.3916
Národná banka Slovenska (Slovakia) 0.9403 0.9314
Suomen Pankki – Finlands Bank (Finland) 1.4853 1.4939
Subtotal for euro area NCBs 81.7681 81.9881
Българска народна банка (Bulgarian National Bank) (Bulgaria) 0.9783 0.9832
Česká národní banka (Czech Republic) 1.9623 1.8794
Danmarks Nationalbank (Denmark) 1.7797 1.7591
Magyar Nemzeti Bank (Hungary) 1.5819 1.5488
Narodowy Bank Polski (Poland) 6.0968 6.0335
Banca Naţională a României (Romania) 2.8888 2.8289
Sveriges Riksbank (Sweden) 2.9441 2.9790
Subtotal for non-euro area NCBs 18.2319 18.0119
Total 100.0000 100.0000
61 These weights are also adjusted whenever there is a change in the number of NCBs that contribute to
the ECB’s capital. These are the NCBs of EU Member States.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 78
Impact on the ECB’s paid-up capital
Due to the overall reduction by 0.2200 percentage points in the weighting of the euro
area NCBs (with fully paid-up subscriptions) in the ECB’s subscribed capital of
€10,825 million, and the equivalent increase in that of the non-euro area NCBs
(which only pay up 3.75% of their subscriptions), the ECB’s paid-up capital
decreased by €23 million on 1 January 2024.
Impact on NCBs’ claims equivalent to the foreign reserve assets transferred to
the ECB
Pursuant to Article 30.2 of the Statute of the ESCB, the contributions of the NCBs to
the transfer of foreign reserve assets to the ECB are fixed in proportion to their share
in the ECB’s subscribed capital. Given the decrease in the weighting of the euro area
NCBs (which transferred foreign reserve assets to the ECB) in the ECB’s subscribed
capital, the claim equivalent to this transfer was also adjusted accordingly. This
resulted in a reduction of €109 million on 1 January 2024, which was repaid to the
euro area NCBs.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 79
2.8 Financial statements 2019-23
2.8.1 Balance sheet
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
ASSETS € millions € millions € millions € millions € millions
Gold and gold receivables 21,976 25,056 26,121 27,689 30,419
Claims on non-euro area residents
denominated in foreign currency 51,188 45,971 51,433 55,603 55,876
Receivables from the IMF 710 680 1,234 1,759 2,083
Balances with banks and security investments,
external loans and other external assets 50,478 45,291 50,199 53,844 53,793
Claims on euro area residents denominated in
foreign currency 2,637 4,788 2,776 1,159 1,450
Claims on non-euro area residents
denominated in euro - 1,830 3,070 - -
Balances with banks, security investments and
loans - 1,830 3,070 - -
Other claims on euro area credit institutions
denominated in euro 109 81 38 12 17
Securities of euro area residents denominated
in euro 250,377 349,008 445,384 457,271 425,349
Securities held for monetary policy purposes 250,377 349,008 445,384 457,271 425,349
Intra-Eurosystem claims 103,420 114,761 123,551 125,763 125,378
Claims related to the allocation of euro banknotes
within the Eurosystem 103,420 114,761 123,551 125,763 125,378
Other assets 27,375 27,797 27,765 31,355 34,739
Tangible and intangible fixed assets 1,330 1,262 1,189 1,105 1,023
Other financial assets 20,633 20,785 21,152 21,213 22,172
Off-balance-sheet instruments revaluation
differences 619 388 620 783 552
Accruals and prepaid expenses 2,572 3,390 4,055 7,815 10,905
Sundry 2,221 1,970 749 438 88
Loss for the year - - - - 1,266
Total assets 457,082 569,292 680,140 698,853 674,496
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 80
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
LIABILITIES € millions € millions € millions € millions € millions
Banknotes in circulation 103,420 114,761 123,551 125,763 125,378
Other liabilities to euro area credit institutions
denominated in euro 1,325 2,559 9,473 17,734 4,699
Liabilities to other euro area residents
denominated in euro 20,466 13,700 7,604 63,863 20,622
General government 18,198 10,012 3,200 48,520 143
Other liabilities 2,268 3,688 4,404 15,343 20,479
Liabilities to non-euro area residents
denominated in euro 7,245 11,567 112,492 78,108 23,111
Liabilities to non-euro area residents
denominated in foreign currency - - - - 24
Deposits, balances and other liabilities - - - - 24
Intra-Eurosystem liabilities 274,632 378,432 375,136 355,474 445,048
Liabilities equivalent to the transfer of foreign
reserves 40,344 40,344 40,344 40,344 40,671
Other liabilities within the Eurosystem (net) 234,288 338,088 334,792 315,130 404,377
Other liabilities 2,962 3,095 2,877 5,908 9,498
Off-balance-sheet instruments revaluation
differences 709 636 568 430 68
Accruals and income collected in advance 66 40 32 3,915 8,030
Sundry 2,188 2,419 2,277 1,562 1,401
Provisions 7,586 7,641 8,268 6,636 67
Revaluation accounts 29,420 28,235 32,277 36,487 37,099
Capital and reserves 7,659 7,659 8,270 8,880 8,948
Capital 7,659 7,659 8,270 8,880 8,948
Profit for the year 2,366 1,643 192 - -
Total liabilities 457,082 569,292 680,140 698,853 674,496
Note: In order to ensure comparability, the amounts shown under sub-items “General government” and “Other liabilities” under the item
“Liabilities to other euro area residents denominated in euro” were adjusted for 2019 in line with the approach applied since 2020.
Further details on this change can be found under “Reclassifications” in Section 2.3 “Accounting policies” of the ECB’s Annual
Accounts 2020.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 81
2.8.2 Profit and loss account
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
€ millions € millions € millions € millions € millions
Interest income on foreign reserve assets 1,052 474 197 798 2,382
Interest income arising from the allocation of euro
banknotes within the Eurosystem - - - 736 4,817
Other interest income 1,828 1,844 1,531 11,001 56,552
Interest income 2,879 2,318 1,728 12,536 63,751
Remuneration of NCBs’ claims in respect of foreign
reserves transferred - - - (201) (1,335)
Other interest expense (193) (301) (162) (11,434) (69,609)
Interest expense (193) (301) (162) (11,636) (70,944)
Net interest income 2,686 2,017 1,566 900 (7,193)
Realised gains/losses arising from financial
operations 197 342 (6) (110) (106)
Write-downs on financial assets and positions (20) (26) (133) (1,840) (38)
Transfer to/from provisions for financial risks 84 (48) (610) 1,627 6,620
Net result of financial operations, write-downs
and risk provisions 260 268 (749) (322) 6,476
Net income/expense from fees and
commissions 531 520 559 585 650
Income from equity shares and participating
interests 1 - 2 1 1
Other income 43 37 56 61 72
Total net income 3,522 2,842 1,435 1,224 6
Staff costs (566) (646) (674) (652) (676)
Administrative expenses (476) (434) (444) (460) (481)
Depreciation of tangible and intangible fixed assets (102) (106) (108) (103) (106)
Banknote production services (12) (14) (13) (9) (9)
Other expenses - - (5) - -
Profit/(loss) for the year 2,366 1,643 192 - (1,266)
Profit distribution 2,366 1,643 192 - -
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Financial statements of the ECB 82
3 Independent auditor’s report
To the President and Governing Council
of the European Central Bank
Frankfurt am Main
Report on the Audit of the ECB’s Financial Statements 2023
Opinion
We have audited the Financial Statements of the European Central Bank (ECB) for
the year ended 31 December 2023 – included in the ECB’s Annual Accounts – which
comprise the balance sheet, the profit and loss account, and a summary of
significant accounting policies and other explanatory notes.
In our opinion, the accompanying Financial Statements give a true and fair view of
the financial position of the ECB as at 31 December 2023 and of the results of its
financial operations for the year then ended in accordance with the principles
established by the Governing Council, which are laid down in Decision (EU)
2016/2247 of the ECB of 3 November 2016 on the annual accounts of the ECB
(ECB/2016/35), as amended, which is based on Guideline (EU) 2016/2249 of the
ECB of 3 November 2016 on the legal framework for accounting and financial
reporting in the European System of Central Banks (ECB/2016/34), as amended.
Basis for Opinion
We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing
(“ISAs”). Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the
Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements section of our
report. We are independent of the ECB in accordance with the German ethical
requirements that are relevant to our audit of the Financial Statements, which are
consistent with the International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants’ Code of
Ethics for Professional Accountants (“IESBA Code”) and we have fulfilled our other
ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements. We believe that the
audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for
our opinion.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Independent auditor’s report 83
Other Information
The ECB’s Executive Board (“Executive Board”) is responsible for the other
information included in the ECB’s Annual Accounts. The other information comprises
all the information included in the ECB’s Annual Accounts except the Financial
Statements of the ECB and our auditor’s report.
Our opinion on the Financial Statements does not cover the other information and
we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the Financial Statements, our responsibility is to read
the other information and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is
materially inconsistent with the Financial Statements or our knowledge obtained in
the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
Responsibilities of the Executive Board and those charged with
Governance for the Financial Statements
The Executive Board is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the
Financial Statements in accordance with the principles established by the Governing
Council, which are laid down in Decision (EU) 2016/2247 of the ECB of
3 November 2016 on the annual accounts of the ECB (ECB/2016/35), as amended,
which is based on Guideline (EU) 2016/2249 of the ECB of 3 November 2016 on the
legal framework for accounting and financial reporting in the European System of
Central Banks (ECB/2016/34), as amended, and for such internal control as the
Executive Board determines is necessary to enable the preparation of Financial
Statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the Financial Statements, the Executive Board is responsible for
assessing the ECB’s ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable,
matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting.
Those charged with governance are responsible for overseeing the ECB’s financial
reporting process.
Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the Financial
Statements as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or
error, and to issue an auditor’s report that includes our opinion. Reasonable
assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit
conducted in accordance with ISAs will always detect a material misstatement when
it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if,
individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence the
economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these Financial Statements.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Independent auditor’s report 84
As part of an audit in accordance with ISAs, we exercise professional judgment and
maintain professional scepticism throughout the planning and performance of the
audit. We also:
• Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the Financial
Statements, whether due to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures
responsive to those risks, and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and
appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. The risk of not detecting a
material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from
error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions,
misrepresentations, or the override of internal control.
• Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to
design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for
the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the ECB’s internal
control.
• Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the
reasonableness of accounting estimates and related disclosures made by
management.
• Conclude on the appropriateness of management’s use of the going concern
basis of accounting and, based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a
material uncertainty exists related to events or conditions that may cast
significant doubt on the ECB’s ability to continue as a going concern. If we
conclude that a material uncertainty exists, we are required to draw attention in
our auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the Financial Statements or, if
such disclosures are inadequate, to modify our opinion. Our conclusions are
based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of our auditor’s report.
• Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the Financial
Statements, including the disclosures, and whether the Financial Statements
represent the underlying transactions and events in a manner that achieves fair
presentation.
We are required to communicate with those charged with governance regarding,
among other matters, the planned scope and timing of the audit and significant audit
findings, including any significant deficiencies in internal control that we identify
during our audit.
Frankfurt am Main, 14 February 2024
Baker Tilly GmbH & Co. KG
Wirtschaftsprüfungsgesellschaft
(Düsseldorf)
Dr. Stefan Wolfgang Fischer Maria Brück
Wirtschaftsprüfer Wirtschaftsprüferin
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Independent auditor’s report 85
4 Note on profit distribution/allocation of
losses
This note is not part of the financial statements of the ECB for the year 2023.
Pursuant to Article 33 of the Statute of the ESCB, the net profit of the ECB shall be
transferred in the following order:
1. an amount to be determined by the Governing Council, which may not exceed
20% of the net profit, shall be transferred to the general reserve fund, subject to
a limit equal to 100% of the capital; and
2. the remaining net profit shall be distributed to the shareholders of the ECB in
proportion to their paid-up shares.62
In the event of a loss incurred by the ECB, the shortfall may be offset against the
general reserve fund of the ECB and, if necessary, following a decision by the
Governing Council, against the monetary income of the relevant financial year in
proportion and up to the amounts allocated to the NCBs in accordance with Article
32.5 of the Statute of the ESCB.63
The ECB’s loss for 2023, after the full release of the provision for financial risks, was
€1,266 million (2022: zero). Following a decision by the Governing Council, this loss
will be carried forward on the ECB’s balance sheet and offset against future profits.
62 Non-euro area NCBs are not entitled to receive any share of the ECB’s distributable profits, nor are
they liable to cover any loss of the ECB.
63 Under Article 32.5 of the Statute of the ESCB, the sum of the NCBs’ monetary income shall be
allocated to the NCBs in proportion to their paid-up shares in the capital of the ECB.
Annual Accounts of the ECB 2023 – Note on profit distribution/allocation of losses 86
Consolidated balance sheet of the
Eurosystem as at 31 December 2023
Assets
(EUR millions)
31 December 31 December
2023 2022
1 Gold and gold receivables 649,110 592,898
2 Claims on non-euro area residents denominated in foreign
currency 499,583 523,240
2.1 Receivables from the IMF 229,003 228,488
2.2 Balances with banks and security investments, external loans and other
external assets 270,581 294,752
3 Claims on euro area residents denominated in foreign currency 13,876 20,417
4 Claims on non-euro area residents denominated in euro 20,097 14,224
4.1 Balances with banks, security investments and loans 20,097 14,224
4.2 Claims arising from the credit facility under ERM II 0 0
5 Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy
operations denominated in euro 410,290 1,324,347
5.1 Main refinancing operations 14,085 2,406
5.2 Longer-term refinancing operations 396,196 1,321,422
5.3 Fine-tuning reverse operations 0 0
5.4 Structural reverse operations 0 0
5.5 Marginal lending facility 10 519
5.6 Credits related to margin calls 0 0
6 Other claims on euro area credit institutions denominated in euro 28,707 31,035
7 Securities of euro area residents denominated in euro 4,898,966 5,102,068
7.1 Securities held for monetary policy purposes 4,694,345 4,937,179
7.2 Other securities 204,621 164,888
8 General government debt denominated in euro 20,917 21,589
9 Other assets 393,943 321,222
Total assets 6,935,489 7,951,039
Consolidated balance sheet of the Eurosystem as at 31 December 2023 1
Liabilities
(EUR millions)
31 December 31 December
2023 2022
1 Banknotes in circulation 1,567,711 1,572,033
2 Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy
operations denominated in euro 3,508,865 3,998,940
2.1 Current accounts (covering the minimum reserve system) 174,019 218,933
2.2 Deposit facility 3,334,822 3,778,787
2.3 Fixed-term deposits 0 0
2.4 Fine-tuning reverse operations 0 0
2.5 Deposits related to margin calls 24 1,219
3 Other liabilities to euro area credit institutions denominated in euro 58,873 78,335
4 Debt certificates issued 0 0
5 Liabilities to other euro area residents denominated in euro 303,864 564,582
5.1 General government 212,791 436,541
5.2 Other liabilities 91,073 128,041
6 Liabilities to non-euro area residents denominated in euro 281,940 540,725
7 Liabilities to euro area residents denominated in foreign currency 16,382 11,683
8 Liabilities to non-euro area residents denominated in foreign
currency 4,474 4,753
8.1 Deposits, balances and other liabilities 4,474 4,753
8.2 Liabilities arising from the credit facility under ERM II 0 0
9 Counterpart of special drawing rights allocated by the IMF 177,116 181,121
10 Other liabilities 260,877 290,578
11 Revaluation accounts 635,144 588,053
12 Capital and reserves 120,242 120,237
Total liabilities 6,935,489 7,951,039
Notes: Based on provisional unaudited data. The annual accounts of all the Eurosystem national central banks will be finalised by the
end of May 2024, and the final annual consolidated balance sheet of the Eurosystem will be published thereafter.
Totals/sub-totals may not add up due to rounding.
Consolidated balance sheet of the Eurosystem as at 31 December 2023 2
© European Central Bank, 2024
Postal address 60640 Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Telephone +49 69 1344 0
Website www.ecb.europa.eu
All rights reserved. Reproduction for educational and non-commercial purposes is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.
The cut-off date for the data included in this report was 22 March 2024 (exceptions are explicitly indicated).
For specific terminology please refer to the ECB glossary (available in English only).
PDF ISBN 978-92-899-6707-5, ISSN 1725-2865, doi:10.2866/368362, QB-AA-24-001-EN-N
HTML ISBN 978-92-899-6700-6, ISSN 1725-2865, doi:10.2866/646090, QB-AA-24-001-EN-Q